SCHONTHAL, RUTH (1924–2006) Jocasta. A post modern Opera in 2 acts (1996/97) (105')

Text by Hélène Cixous in French English Translation: Judith Graves-Miller fue 2525

ISMN: 979-0-50012-438-2 KA/ps ISMN: 979-0-50012-288-3 h.m. Besetzung/Scoring: Synth/Klav, Live-Elektro- nik, Tonbd, Ch (griech.), Spr, Soli Auftragswerk von Voice and Vision. Eine Neo-Freudianische, feministische Sichtweise auf Ödipus. Die Hauptpersonen Jocaste und Ödipus werden sowohl durch einen Schau- spieler (mit Musik) als auch durch einen Opernsänger und einen Tänzer dargestellt. Daneben steht als Spr Tiresias und ein griechi- scher Chor. Für Synthesizer oder Klavier. Elek- tronische Klangeffekte und Tonband werden hinzugefügt. Nur Klavierauszug erhältlich. A neo-Freudian, contemporary Feminist slant on the Ödipus legend. The principal charac- ters: Jocasta and Ödipus are each represen- ted by an actor (with music), an opera singer and dancer. In addition, there is the speak- ing character of Tiresias and a Greek Chorus. Some electronic sounds and tape added. Only piano-vocal score available. "Voice and Vision, the theatre company on the Lower East Side, is committed to developing works by and about women and girls. And 'Jocasta' the latest commissioned production, is evidence of that commitment. The work uses opera, dance and the spoken work to tell the Oedipus story from the imagined perspective of Jocasta, his mother and, later, his wife. She is portrayed as a woman who is deeply scared as a child when her father departed and died. Fearing that Oedipus, her husband, will also abandon her, she clings to him. When he learns what their relationship really is, Jocasta admits to knowing it all along and charges that on some level, so did he. The all-female creative team includes the composer Ruth Schonthal, the director Marya Mazor and the transla- tors of the French libretto by Hélène Cixous.

29

Bühnenmusik Incidental Music

Ms. Schonthal's essentially tonal music is spiked with dissonance and is eclectic, espe- cially in its bold use of repetitive patterns. But long stretches of spoken dialogue, overbear- ingly amplified, tend to dominate. The work is serious and the stark production offers a fine young cast." (New York Times 1998) "Jocasta has an intensity that leaves the au- dience shaken. The performance integrated music, pantomime, dance, solo song, choral singing, and choral speaking in a skillfully coordinated, smooth, and lovingly-prepared production.” (IAWM Journal, Fall 1998).