Sofia Gubaidulina - Impact and Influences on the Double Bass
"The possibility for string instruments to derive pitches of various heights at one and the same place on the string can be experienced in music as the transition to another plane of existence. And that is joy"
- Sofia Gubaidulina56
The importance of the works of Sofia Gubaidulina for this research stems from her pioneering use of non-traditional compositional methods and exploration of extended techniques. Gubaidulina's fascination with percussion and low strings is indicative in the extensive number of works she has produced for cello, viola and double bass. Furthermore, because she is considered a first-class composer and for having her works being performed all over Europe and U.S. by leading ensembles such as The New York Philharmonic, the Boston Symphony, and the Chicago Symphony, Gubaidulina significantly calls our attention to the musical potentials of the double bass and its repertoire.
Canonic chamber music repertoire which includes the double bass is not as extensive as that for upper strings and wind instruments. One of the reasons for the lack of chamber music repertoire for double bass is that the instrument has been historically misunderstood and unexplored.57 The role of the double bass, and other historical versions of it, was traditionally rooted in providing the harmonic support and rhythmic accuracy to the ensemble, and it was only after the nineteenth century that melodic and freer parts started to appear in chamber works for the instrument.
With the development of modernism and postmodernism in the twentieth century, the possibilities of repertoire for the instrument expanded considerably. At this time, many double
bass virtuosos such as Serge Koussevitzky (1874-1951) consolidated their influence worldwide
.
56 “Shostakovich String Quartet 15. Gubaidulina Rejoice!," Gramophone, accessed March 5, 2019, https://www.gramophone.co.uk/review/shostakovich-string-quartet-15-gubaidulina-rejoice 57 Gudrun Raschen, “Chamber Music with Double Bass: A New Approach to Function and Pedagogy” (DMA diss, University of North Texas, 2009).
25
and meticulously demonstrated new techniques that explored the potential of the instrument. Moving closer to the twenty-first century, composers such as Gubaidulina started to shift musical interests toward a timbrally experimental character, instead of a formal pitch-centered type of composition. The double bass and its wide range of possibilities of tone and harmonic richness began to be thoroughly explored, and it continues to be up to the present, remaining a common instrument choice for chamber music compositions based on new music aesthetics.
Gubaidulina's chamber and solo works often explore pitch clusters, micro-chromaticism, the use of gestures, improvisation, and free tempo combined with well-defined rhythmic structures. She frequently writes double bass parts that apply the use of extended techniques in exploring the broad timbral range of the instrument. For example, the bass player is instructed to play on different regions of the instrument and apply varying pressure to the string with the bow. She often includes non-traditional objects in the score, such as a “friction stick” in her Galgenlieder song cycle and a cup of glass in her piece, Sotto Voce.
The works of Gubaidulina have been analyzed and studied by scholars through many different lenses. Andreas Angell wrote a dissertation about her use of timbre, texture and spiritual symbolism; Valeria Tsenova discussed her use of numbers, Fibonacci series and Lucas sequence; and Colin Clarke has a publication in the magazine Fanfare discussing the CD,
“Chamber Music with Double Bass,” featuring bassist Martin Heinze and ten full chamber works by Gubaidulina including the double bass.58
58 Andreas Nikolai Angell, “Timbre, Texture and Spiritual Symbolism in Gubaidulina's Two Works, De Profundis and Et Expecto. Aural Sonology as a Tool to Explore Sonic and Structural Aspects of Interpretation in Contemporary Accordion Music” (Master's thesis, Norwegean Academy of Music, 2017); Valeria Tsenova, "Magic Numbers in the Music of Sofia Gubaidulina,” Muzikologija, no. 2 (2002): 253-61; Colin Clarke, "Gubaidulina: 5 Etudes. Pantomime. 8 Etudes. Bass Sonata. In Croce. Quasi Hoquetus. Silenzio. Ein Engel. Galgenlieder à 3. Pentimento," Fanfare 35, no. 5 (2012): 228-29.
26
Double bassist and music theory scholar Michael Berry's 2009 article, “The Importance
of Bodily Gesture in Sofia Gubaidulina's Music for Low Strings,” discusses the attention to the body in Gubaidulina's compositions. Berry examines the nature of gestures in music and provides a wonderful literature review on the topic. He defines gesture in three broad categories: expressive gestures, practical gestures, and cues. Moreover, he uses this subdivision to analyze works by Gubaidulina. One of the key concepts in Berry's article is “kinesthetic empathy,” which is when the movements of the musicians impact the listener. In this case, the performer is enabled through the composer's music to show periods of tension and relaxation to their audience.
For example, Berry analyzes the beginnings of Gubaidulina's works Sonata and Pantomime: the first one starts slowly in a low comfortable position, and the second one starts in a high register with the use of artificial harmonics. Pantomime's beginning suggests greater instability since the performer is probably not completely comfortable and concerned that the harmonics might not speak right away. This difference of approach is going to create aspects of tension or relaxation in the performance of the piece, that will likely be perceptible to the listener.
Another important example of embodiment in Gubaidulina's works including the double bass is her song cycle Galgenlieder (Gallows Songs). This piece has a movement called “Fisches Nachtgesang" based on a silent poem by Christian Morgenstern. The entire movement is written to be performed without sounds, only gestures. In this case, the composer creates a sign language or a "gestural system of communications”59 that allows the performers to successfully provide
the conveyed musical ideas to the audience.
59 Michael Berry, “The Importance of Bodily Gesture in Sofia Gubaidulina's Music for Low Strings,” Music Theory Online 15 (2009): 7.
27
The theory of embodiment in relationship to Gubaidulina has been applied to performance settings by bassist Megan McDevitt, who published a set of three dissertation- recitals including program notes with contextual information about the pieces and composers involved in the performances. Her final recital was titled “To Own a Body,” and she performed four of Gubaidulina's Eight Etudes for the Double Bass accompanied by two dancers, Paula Modafferi and Chloe Gonzales. In her program notes, McDevitt builds a relationship between embodiment in Gubaidulina's piece, with the concept of "body" as discussed by musicologist Suzanne Cusick in "Feminist Theory, Music Theory, and the Mind/Body Problem, 60which explores how masculine and feminine genders are associated with the mind and the body.
Undoubtedly, the work of Gubaidulina has a major impact in the double bass repertoire and in the theoretical sphere surrounding performances of her pieces. Several artists have recorded her works throughout the years, and her double bass Sonata can be heard by double bass players such as Martin Heinze, Daniele Roccato, Niek de Groot and Dan Styffe. Her use of symbolism and gestures in music have influenced both instrumentalists and theorists, and she continues to be an inspiration to many musicians who wish to explore innovative, thoughtful and deeper paths in music.
60 Suzanne G Cusick, “Feminist Theory, Music Theory, and the Mind/body Problem,” Perspectives of New Music 32, no. 1 (1994): 18.
28