Diversity and the Western Classical Music Canon
In 2017, Jesse Rosen, President and CEO of the League of the American Orchestras, posted an open letter arguing that “orchestras' long-term artistic and institutional health” is dependent upon their "sustained commitment to diversity, equity, and inclusion.”4 Earlier that same year, Rosen gave a speech at the Association of British Orchestras (ABO) annual conference where he claimed that “if we want music to fully contribute to the democratic process, then I think we need to consider how the concert experience can be welcoming to all, not just our traditional audiences. And if we want to figure out how to address these admittedly complex challenges, then we must reach out to other voices besides our own.
95
During his presentation at the ABO conference, Rosen acknowledged the ethnic and gender reality among orchestras in the United States in which persons of color are underrepresented by a large margin. He also addressed the issue that little has changed over the past twenty years, despite efforts to improve commitments to multiculturalism. While gender equality has definitely increased among instrumentalists, positions such as conductors and board members still continue to be overwhelmingly white and male. These observations about
4 Jesse Rosen, "A Time to Act," August 24, 2017, accessed March 4, 2019. https://americanorchestras.org/news- publications/public-statements/a-time-to-act.html
5 Jesse Rosen Speech at ABO, January 25, 2017, accessed March 4, 2019, https://www.abo.org.uk/media/108458/Jesse_Rosen-Speech_ABO_17-final.pdf
4
inequality bled Rosen to question the role of orchestras in addressing diversity issues within classical music culture.
According to Rosen, if we want to think about inclusion, we must ask “who the arts are for" and "how resources are distributed.” He finds answers to these questions in the writing of Martha Nussbaum, who argues that the arts and humanities are key to “the ability to think critically, the ability to transcend local loyalties and to approach world problems as a citizen of 96
the world, and finally the ability to imagine sympathetically the predicament of another person.
For Rosen, democracy needs more of the humanities, and to achieve that, we should broaden our horizons in our approach to music.
The concept of the musical canon seams to represent the ideological adversity that minorities must face in Western classical music. In 1987, Allan Bloom published The Closing of the American Mind, which featured conservative statements about how abandoning the Western canon and promoting equality, and stamping out racism, sexism and elitism was problematic to the curricula of U.S. universities. The impact of his criticism was substantial enough in the 1990s that the philosophical war surrounding the canonic tradition hoisted against the promotion of diversity became a duality of the new versus the old, the left versus the right, relativism versus rationality. The topic was discussed by many scholars and it, of course, influenced musical studies as well. In the early 1990s, Katherine Bergeron and Philip Bohlman addressed the issue of the canon, defining it as a “measuring stick.”” Similarly, in a 2007 essay marking twenty years since the publication of Bloom's book, New York Times journalist Rachel Donadio described the canon as something that creates boundaries and implies repetitions when being legitimated in
6 Ibid.
7 Katherine Bergeron and Philip V. Bohlman, eds. Disciplining Music: Musicology and its Canons (University of Chicago Press, 1992), 2.
5
critical and ideological terms. The canon is a system that orders, divides, and segments; it is easily recognizable in repertoire programs and requirements at a typical school of music in the United States. Its existence might be observable in different levels in our society as well, and it is the source of most of the diversity problems identified in the classical music contexts of the twenty-first century.
William Weber wrote about the concept of the canon in 1999, highlighting different types of principles applied to its conception, among them, repertoire, craft, and criticism. According to Weber, the ideological canon demands a complicated analytical process and it defines what is popular and classical, what is moral, spiritual and civic. Weber emphasized this ideology as a means to understand how we build social values with the practice of the canon. The division that comes with the ideological canon supports cultural supremacy, justifying the predominance of Western elites over lower classes, which leads to rigidity and social divisions within modern society. This concept of canon can be associated with a traditional way of learning in our schools, one that emphasizes what is good and what is bad, what should be kept, and what shouldn't.
The idea of having disciplined a body of repertoire that somehow controls and divides makes it simpler for a complex story to be told. The field of classical music is focused on Western European traditions that are mainly rooted in compositions by white, male composers. How are we supposed to inspire women and minorities in the field if “their own” achievement is rarely represented in concert hall? So, coming back to Bloom and the canon/diversity war, a
question still needs to be answered. Is there a way we can find balance between criticizing our
8 Rachel Donadio,"Revisiting the Canon Wars," New York Times Book Review 16 (2007): 16-17.
9 William Weber, “The History of Musical Canon,” in Rethinking Music, eds. Nicholas Cook and Mark Everist (New York: Oxford University Press, 2001).
6
traditions and opening up for new and diverse music while trying to protect and respect the
discipline and the artful construction of music?
In her introductory chapter to the book, Redefining Music Studies in an Age of Change: Creativity, Diversity and Integration, Patricia Sheehan Campbell, raises the question of what it means to be an educated musician in the twenty-first century. 10 Among other concerns, she explores the idea of a curriculum engaged in an interdisciplinary approach that is ecological and that highlights cultural sustainability and social justice. Campbell divides her ideas into three areas: (1) the essential purpose of music study, (2) the nature of foundational musical experience, and (3) the content of curriculum, music engagement, and leadership. While promoting this structural change, Campbell opposes the devaluation of the European tradition and instead proposes new levels of rigor and excellence created through emphasis on real world practices such as the artist's involvement with the community, creativity and improvisation. Campbell's argument represents a completely new way of understanding the role of the professional musician in our contemporary society and it is successful in recommending practical strategies to make that happen.
The strong tradition of canonic rigidity is still present in our schools, which concedes to exclusionary practices. Campbell's curricular framework suggests that if we want a real change to happen, there is still much to be done, starting with the way we shape our values and identify musicality. This catalog is inspired by this way of thinking, and it aims to facilitate access to create inclusion and to open further discussion into what it means to take a feminist and humanitarian approach to our performances and in our learning venues.
10 Patricia Shehan Campbell, “The Lay of the Land,” in Redefining Music Studies in an Age of Change: Creativity, Diversity, and Integration, ed. Edward Sarath, et al. (New York: Routledge, 2016), 1.
7