Gender and the Double Bass
During the 2017 convention of the International Society of Bassists (ISB), Megan
McDevitt gave a lecture in which she highlighted gendered statistics in United States' symphony
orchestras and addressed how the bass is perceived as masculine. In her presentation, she
20 Ibid., 224
21 Ibid., 223-224.
22 Marcia J. Citron, “Gender, Professionalism and the Musical Canon,” Journal of Musicology 8 (1990): 109.
23 Ibid., 112
24 Ibid., 114.
11
mentioned the importance of representation in encouraging young female performers in the 25
beginning of their career.
Similar to low brass and percussion, the double bass has long been considered a male- dominated instrument. Amy Phelps explored this issue in her 2010 dissertation, “Beyond Auditions: Gender Discrimination in America's Top Orchestras.” Phelps covered aspects of the history of women as instrumentalists and called the attention to the lack of female representation in certain sections of the orchestra, including the double bass section. In addition, she discusses the problem of gender stereotypes.
Female string bass players have not only chosen a large, cumbersome instrument deemed unfeminine by traditional stereotypes; but the string bass is also associated with jazz, which historically has implied a whole underworld of gritty nightlife. 26
Regarding the persistent association of masculinity with the double bass, Phelps mentions the world-famous bassist Esperanza Spalding. Spalding pointed out in an interview with The New Yorker that sometimes people even associate masculinity with quality of playing, mentioning the recurrent statement of: “Man, she's a monster, she sounds like a dude!”27 Phelps observes that "Spalding, along with many accomplished female performers, is ironically accused of being unfeminine if she plays well, but would be accused of being a weak, incompetent female if she is not successful."28
The double bass is the largest instrument in the string family, and it produces low
frequencies of sound. In addition, its role is associated with providing the basis or the harmonic
25 Megan McDevitt, “The Bass and Gender". Megan McDevitt official website, accessed March 4, 2019, https://meganmcdevitt.wordpress.com/the-bass-and-gender.
26 Amy Phelps, "Beyond Auditions: Gender Discrimination in America's Top Orchestras” (DMA diss., University of Iowa, 2010), 63.
27 John Colapinto, "Profiles: New Note - Esperanza Spalding," The New Yorker 86, no. 4 (March 2010): 36. 28 Phelps, "Beyond Auditions,” 65.
12
and rhythmic ground of an ensemble, which is often associated to the idea of masculinity. Examples of this association can be found in the classic 1923 book by Frederick H. Martens, String Mastery. Martens presents short essays from “the most valid opinion of the day, that of the distinguished virtuosos and teachers of the instruments.”29 In one interview with Ludwig Emanuel Manoly, a graduate of the Vienna Conservatory and faculty of the New York Institute of Musical Art. Manoly mentions the “beautifully sonorous and virile tone of the powerful contrabass register”30 and discusses the influence of physique in playing the instrument.
My first bit of advice is: Do not take up the doublebass unless you are physically strong, unless you have a good physique – for you will need it. In order to play the contra-bass or bass viol, the player must be muscularly well-developed.31
The point of view expressed by Manoly represents a typical stereotype of the double bass player: the strong, tall and, very likely, male player. Unfortunately, this portrait influenced further generations with common associations regarding the instrument, and it has been carried up to the present, directly affecting women's representation in the professional settings of the double bass.
While trying to understand the sources and origin of gender stereotype related to instrumentalists, many scholars have worked in a diverse set of qualitative and quantitative approaches. Mark E. Vickers32 contributed to the understanding of gender stereotype in instrumental choice, and Blair A. Williams³³ investigated the field of music education,
29 Frederick H. Martens. String Mastery: Talks with Master Violinists, Viola Players and Violoncellists: Comprising Interviews with Casals, Huberman, Macmillen, Erica Morini, Svečenski, the Members of the Flonzaley Quartet and Others (New York: F.A. Srikes, 1923), v.
30 Ibid., 282.
31 Ibid., 279.
32 Mark E. Vickers, "The Effect of Model Gender on Instrument Choice Preference of Beginning Band Students," (PhD diss. University of Hartford, 2015).
33 Blair A. Williams, "String Instrument Choice: A Study on External Factors," (PhD diss., Kansas State University, 2012).
13
discussing the influence of external factors and psychology. Phelps also mentions the study of
Jason Zervoudakes and Judith M. Tanur regarding gender and musical instruments.
Musical instruments are gendered. Research indicates that regardless of whether we concentrate on who actually plays the instrument or on the images or stereotypes evoked by their names, certain instruments are considered feminine and others masculine, though which instruments are assigned to which gender seems to differ 34 over time and with various age-groups.
For several years, women have been affected by gender role play, which has caused an inherent lack of representation in double bass professional settings. Even though the number of female bassists has increased in the past several years, it is still rare to see women in professional orchestras and as finalists in major double bass competitions. According to McDevitt only 8.3% of people playing double bass in high level professional orchestras are female. 35This issue reflects the scopes of pedagogy of and composition for the instrument as well, and we can observe that most of the methods and literature developed for the double bass were written by men. Examples of that can be seen in the “Comprehensive Catalogue of Music, Books Recordings and Videos for the Double Bass”36 and in Bass World's bibliography of "Virtuosi of the Double Bass."37
As an attempt to encourage new compositions for the double bass by women, in 2018, Bass Europe (Lucca) international convention, there was a worldwide call for music by female composers, offering a prize for a newly-composer concerto. The winner was the piece Omaggio a Geminiani by Elena Cattini, which became a required piece for the Solo Competition final at the same convention.
34 Jason Zervoudakes and Judith M. Tanur, “Gender and Musical Instruments: Winds of Change?” Journal of Research in Music Education 42, no. 1 (1994): 58
35 Megan McDevitt. “Femininity, Masculinity, and the Bass” Accessed in March 3, 2019.
https://meganmcdevitt.wordpress.com/the-bass-and-gender/
36 Murray Grodner, Comprehensive Catalog of Music, Books, Recordings and Videos for the Double Bass. Grodner Publications, 2000
37 Adrian O. Mann “Virtuosi of the double bass,” Bass World no.4 (1975): 80-82.
14
Efforts have been made through institutions such as the International Society of Bassists
and Bass Europe to improve gendered barriers in the double bass world. However, it is unfortunate that the work and music of women composers from diverse styles and origins are still noticeable absent in concert halls, double bass recitals and schools' curricula across the country.