Saariaho, Kaija
Ciel étoilé
Date of Composition: 1999
Date of Publication: 2000
Instrumentation: db; perc
Duration: 5'
Publisher: Chester Music
Number of Performers: 2
Annotations: Double bass sounding harmonics and multiphonics. 36 bars. Playing Techniques: s.p.; s.t.; nat. harmonic; tr.; multiphonics; trem.; pizz
OCLC number: 52369914
Online suggested recordings: https://youtu.be/VACedKjwWD0
Source: OCLC; CW; SC
Bosun's cheer
Date of Composition: 2014
Date of Publication: 2015
Instrumentation: fl; vc; db; narr
Duration: 4'
Publisher: Chester Music
Number of Performers: 4
Annotations: Energetic. Moments of speaking while playing and ad lib. repetition. Playing Techniques: s.p.; s.t.; increase bow pressure into scratch tone; breath tone; multiphonics; gliss; chords;
pizz; tr.
OCLC number: 928399754
Source: OCLC; CW; SC
Miranda's lament
Date of Composition: 1997
Instrumentation: S; cl; hp; vn; db
Duration: 6'
Publisher: Chester Music
161
Number of Performers: 5
Annotations: Text from "The Tempest" by William Shakespeare.
Playing Techniques: tr.; no vibrato; s.p.; s.t.; add bow pressure to produce a distorted sound
Dedication: Paavo Heininen
OCLC number: 84375952
Recordings: From the grammar of dreams
Online suggested recordings: https://youtu.be/SEeC3bxn9xQ
Source: OCLC; CW; SC
Sombre
Date of Publication: 2012
Instrumentation: bfl; perc; hp; db
Duration: 18'
Publisher: Chester Music
Number of Performers: 5
Annotations: Texts by Ezra Pound from his "Cantos."
Playing Techniques: s.p.; s.t.; on the bridge; increase bow pressure into scratch tone; trill between harmonic and normal pressure; gliss; trem.; artificial harmonics; pizz; vibrato
Commission: The Serge Koussevitzky Music Foundation and Da Camera of Houston
Dedication: The memory of Serge and Natalie Koussevitzky
OCLC number: 903002658
Online suggested recordings: https://youtu.be/XE_HCEHdhoY Source: OCLC; CW; SC
Prospero's vision
Date of Publication: 2002
Instrumentation: Bar; cl; hp; vn; db
Duration: 5'
Publisher: Chester Music
Number of Performers: 5
Annotations: Text from "The Tempest" by William Shakespeare.
Playing Techniques: s.p.; s.t.; harmonics; trem.; vibrato; trill between harmonic and normal pressure
Dedication: Peter Sellars
OCLC number: 84376438
Source: OCLC; CW; SC
Folia
Date of Publication: 1995 Instrumentation: db; tape Duration: 10'
Publisher: Chester Music
Number of Performers: 2
Annotations: Relevant piece for the bass repertoire that displays live electronics and timbre explorations on the double bass by strong usage of extended techniques and harmonics. The piece has two types of notation, when marked lento, it is free from pulsation and during more rhythmic passages, there is a precise notation and tempo recommendation. The sound engineer should read the score and adjust the relative levels of the double bass and electronics on the mixing desk.
Playing Techniques: L.H. pizz; art. harmonics; nat. harmonics; specific bow pressure; micro intervals; sp.; s.t.; trem.; tr.; vibrato; sfz
Technical Requirements: Macintosh computer equipped with an external audio interface compatible with Max. Microphone for the Double Bass. Mixer & stereo diffusion. Electronics part can be run with a Max patch including all effects.
Technique Level: Advanced Commission: GRAME
162
Dedication: Jean-Pierre Robert
OCLC number: 51956733
Recordings: Une Contrabasse, un Humain - Jean-Pierre Robert
Online suggested recordings: 1 - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OeMns5H2eCk; 2- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=529TmBykJRY Source: OCLC; CW; SC