Dinescu, Violeta
Sleepsong & The Toy
Date of Composition: 1981
Date of Publication: 2000
Instrumentation: db; pf Number of Performers: 2
Annotations: This are two separete short pieces that were likely written together and can be found in the same manuscript. They are written in the lower registers of the bass and can be played mostly in first and second positions. While Sleepsong makes a cantabile and expressive piece, The Toy is an Allegreto Vivaci, which has marcato strong rhythmic themes.
Playing Techniques: pizz; harmonics; sfz
Technique Level: Beginner
OCLC number: 837914960
Source: OCLC; SC
Abendandacht
Date of Composition: 1985
Instrumentation: db
Duration: 3'
Number of Performers: 1
Annotations: "Placido e Malancolico". This piece is intended to be performed by a trumpet but there is also a version for double bass. It is a short meditative solo piece.
Playing Techniques: repeat x ad lib.
Style/Genre: Modal
Technique Level: Intermediate
OCLC number: 24096437
Source: OCLC; SC
Lytaniae I
Date of Composition: 2010 Instrumentation: db
Duration: 6'
Publisher: Grafik: Rima Chahine, Handschrift: Violeta Dinescu, Layout: Clemens Kohne Number of Performers: 1
Annotations: Lytaniae I is a "Variant fur Kontrabass" original for cello, and a fragment from Folio 191 nr. 329. Dinescu used material from "Codex Caioni" or "Johannes Caioni" (1629-87) who was a Transylvanian Franciscan monk, musician and Roman Catholic priest. The piece is characterized by an intense ostinato of long open strings, it starts on the G string, moving to D, A, and, finally E. The open strings are held throughout the music and small interventions are added to it. The interventions can be glissandos on the other strings, tremolos or short accented notes. Percussive effects and noisy sounds are indicated in the score.
Playing Techniques: Trem.; gliss; tr.; app; micro intervals; 1/4 sharp; 3/4 sharp
Technique Level: Advanced
OCLC number: 863611564
Online suggested recordings: Viola version: https://youtu.be/IW4NHkFMaRE Source: OCLC; SC
Quarzspiele auf der Suche nach Mozart - Concerto for Double Bass and Orchestra Date of Composition: 2009
71
Instrumentation: db, symphony orchestra
Publisher: Grafik: Rima Chahine, Handschrift: Violeta Dinescu, Layout: Clemens Kohne Annotations: Dinescu brings a very specific notation for articulation and effects. She notates the intesity of vibrato, specific speed and weight of the bow. Tempo and ad lib. moments are also mentioned in the score. Dinescu named each movement of this concerto after stones: Trystin - Prasiolith - Quarzglas - Tridimyt - Schwingquarz - Dacit - Reliefschnitt in Amethyst
Playing Techniques: Gliss; tr.; art. harmonics; nat. harmonics; trem.; vibrato; s.p.; s.t.; ad lib.; chords; sfz; app; bow pressure
Technical Requirements: mute; BEAD tuning
Technique Level: Advanced
OCLC number: 863601627
Source: OCLC; SC