Three Case Studies
This catalog consists of a diverse list of works by women composers for the double bass
and provides performers and researchers with pertinent information such as instrumentation, duration, playing techniques, and sources for obtaining scores of these works. It is important, however, that this project conceives of composers as individuals and investigates how their work may affect different spheres surrounding performances of and research about the double bass.
The following case studies consider the contributions of three women composers: French double bassist and composer Joëlle Léandre (b. 1951), Russian composer Sofia Gubaidulina (b. 1931), and Romanian composer Violeta Dinescu (b. 1953). These case studies present a contextualized approach of composers whose careers and works are related to the literature review of this essay.
Joëlle Léandre is as an artist who explores boundaries between composition and improvisation, engaging in a more flexible way of viewing music without the rigidity of the canon. Sofía Gubaidulina has significantly contributed to the double bass repertoire in the realms of exploration of techniques. Her work has stimulated theoretical research regarding embodiment in music. Finally, Violeta Dinescu is a composer who has composed a double bass concerto and developed a style of composition inspired by mathematics and Romanian folk music. Collectively, these women give voice to the double bass through their own perspectives in music, demonstrating diversity in their works and in their artistic endeavors.
19
Joëlle Léandre – Exploring Boundaries between Composition and Improvisation
"Now is the life, today and not tomorrow. This
can be understood quite young, understood clearly. I can be an angry woman, and this is a good vibration. I can use inner rage to keep the utopia, the idea of changing the world. Artists have a job, to change the world"
- Joëlle Léandre44
With a strong background in classical music through years of training in the Paris Conservatory, double bass player Joëlle Léandre decided to pursue her unique musical path through engagement with improvised music, interdisciplinary performances, jazz, and composition. Léandre often expresses a distinct vision about the rigidity surrounding classical music repertoire, challenging the established system through a search for freedom that is evident in her work.
Léandre has more than 150 recordings to her credit, and she has worked extensively with chamber groups of new music such as Pierre Boulez's Ensemble InterContemporain, a highly- acclaimed progressive music ensemble in Paris. She has also commissioned and premiered works by several composers, such as John Cage and Giacinto Scelsi. Her contributions to the techniques, recordings, and repertoire of the double bass, are remarkable for their range and excellence.
Léandre's work is very fluid and takes different forms. For this reason, it is not a simple task to compile all of her compositions for the purposes of a catalog such as this one. Because of the highly improvisatory nature of her work, Léandre has published only a few scores of her own compositions. This catalog not only includes listings for Taxi, Octobre, and For Peter H., for which scores are widely available in libraries around the world, but also references selections
from her prolific discography as well as pieces listed on her website.
44"Freedom, Responsibility & Transformation in Jazz and Society.” Joëlle Léandre official website, accessed in March 4, 2019, http://www.joelle-leandre.com/wp-content/uploads/2009/10/article-freedom.pdf.
20
In an interview with Frances-Marie Uitti for the Contemporary Music Review, Léandre
explains that improvisation is often marginalized in conservatories and claims to be “polemic about this split between academic culture and institutional art.”45 According to Léandre, there is a relationship of power in the system surrounding music conservatories, in which students are not allowed to put themselves extensively into their works or freely play the music that is in their head without looking at a score.
When we are creative or improvise, we and even the students could be very sharp, on top of things, and then our approach to Mozart or Scarlatti would reflect more individuality. But the people and society don't want individuality, they want the mass-produced (...) But the academies don't wish this; they want to control the music business. It's the same in society every day. 46
A similar argument is featured on William Colangelo's dissertation “The Composer-performer Paradigm in Giacinto Scelsi's Solo Works.”47 In an interview with Colangelo, Léandre criticizes
the way music is fixed in a score in European culture, causing loss of individual freedom, lack of political involvement, and diminishment of embodiment in music. In opposition to the fixation of text in music, Léandre refers to Zen aesthetics, referencing the work of composer Giacinto Scelsi. According to her, Scelsi values the freedom of the interpreter by suggesting that they
should be true to themselves, and that they should play without lies or concerns about mistakes.
You have the freedom to be you, and this is very Zen, because [Scelsi] had all that philosophy, I could say, he was close to this thinking, Indian. You find a part of this way 48 to be you.
When the system surrounding conservatories places extra emphasis on the score, the idea
of embodiment tends to receive less attention in performances. According to Léandre,
45 Frances-Marie Uitt, “Joelle Leandre” Contemporary Music Review 25, no. 5-6 (2006): 559-65.
46 Uitt, "Joelle Leandre," 564 (emphasis added).
47 William Colangelo, “The Composer-performer Paradigm in Giacinto Scelsi's Solo Works” (PhD diss. New York
University, 1996) 55-60.
48 Ibid., 60.
21
improvisation allows the musician to express themselves more freely and to create art with their
bodies at the moment of the performance.
In improvisation you have, I could say, spontaneity, love, body, because composed music is too often this trilogy and this top on the top (pointing to head) and they forget this other I mean the soul, the head, and down, the body, the sex and everything. 49
The concept of exploring boundaries between composition and performance is something that
she applies to her work, and that extends to the idea of breaking the rigidity of the canon. Léandre defends the importance of freedom of interpretation and sees value in being a unique artist and being completely true to oneself while performing music. Her statements reflect a thoughtful and artistic personality, which has enabled her to become a pioneer in experimental music and improvisation. She has collaborated with painters, dancers, actors and writers in diverse settings and styles. In addition, she often express political and social opinion through her work.
In December of 2017, Léandre wrote a polemic open letter to the organizers of the annual “Les Victoires du Jazz” awards criticizing the lack of gender representation in mainstream music festivals. In a response to an all-male podium, Léandre accused the organizers of manufacturing the results as “a provocation or a charade.” 50 She affirmed that the judges of the French jazz awards should abandon ancient views and start listening, and paying attention to female musicians, instead of “congregating a self-congratulatory atmosphere.”51
Although this situation occurred in the context of a jazz festival, the same issues of representation can be observed in classical music and any improvisational setting, regardless of
49 Ibid., 58.
50 Joëlle Léandre, “Open Letter by Joëlle Léandre to Accuse the Organisers of French Jazz Awards for Lack of Gender Diversity and Mainstream Choices,” The Free Jazz Collective, December 2017, accessed March 3, 2019, http://www.freejazzblog.org/2017/12/open-letter-by-joelle-leandre-to-accuse.html. 51 Ibid.
22
genre. It is still very common to see all-male podiums and all-male finalists when the featured instrumentalist is the double bass player. 52 As a response to these issues of gender imbalance, Léandre takes an activist approach to her life and career.
Always committed to the value of music in mediating human interaction, Léandre's feminist perspective led to her involvement with a number of all-female musical groups. She was a member of the European Women Improvising Group (EWIG) in the early 80's, an avant-garde experimental group that emerged from the Feminist Improvising Group (FIG) in the late 70^{\prime}s. Léandre later co-founded Les Diaboliques, a prominent trio, improvisational in character, with vocalist Maggie Nichols and pianist Irene Schweizer. A brilliant interview with Les Diaboliques appeared in Julia Smith's interdisciplinary dissertation, “Diva-dogs: Sounding Women Improvising."53 In this interview, the trio reinforces views about the lack of gender representation in music festivals. According to them, there are plenty of women playing improvised music everywhere, but they are still not seen in festivals, and people think they do not exit.54 They also mention that, historically, men tend not to accept women as pioneers and innovators, which clearly affects the music scene of improvised music and composition.
In her dissertation, “The Myth of Absence: Representation, Reception and the Music of Experimental Women Improvisors”55 Dana Reason examines how media, journalism, and music criticism presents issues surrounding escaping the canon and promoting inclusion for women in improvisation. According to the study, there is a problem in the way women improvisors are
52 Examples can be found at the ISB list of past winners. “ISB Double Bass Performance Competition – Past Winners," International Society for Bassists, accessed March 11, 2019,
https://www.isbworldoffice.com/performance-past-winners.asp.
53 Julie Smith, "Diva-dogs: Sounding Women Improvising” (PhD diss., The University of British Columbia, 2001) 233-275.
54 Ibid.
55 Dana Reason Myers, “The Myth of Absence: Representation, Reception and the Music of Experimental Women Improvisors," (PhD diss., University of California, 2002) 19-81.
23
represented in media—largely in that women are absent from media coverage of musical improvisation—which reinforces the lack of women's activity in these traditionally male- dominated realms of musical performance. Furthermore, reason asserts that when someone is lining up a recital or a festival featuring only women, gendered perceptions lead to the
assumption of lower standards and that mediocre musicians have been hired, when this is not the
case.
Little has changed in the nearly twenty years since Reason's dissertation and media representations of women composers, improvisors and double-bassists continue to be largely absent. The works compiled in this catalog prove to be diverse in style, rich in quality and expansive in number. In the case of Joëlle Léandre, her music and personal statements illustrate a different way of understanding music, by inspiring composers and double bass players to be even more complete musicians and artists.
24