ABBREVIATIONS FOR SOURCES
SC
Score
MAN
Manuscript
CW
Composer's official website
PW
Publisher's official Website
Perf. W
Performer's Website (includes YouTube, Venmo and Soundcloud pages)
C
Composer (direct correspondence with the composer)
CD
Compact Disc recording
References for the following sources cited in Appendix A.
OCLC
WorldCat database
GRV
Oxford Music Online (Grove)
AC
Aaron Cohen - International Encyclopedia of Women Composers
IMSLP
International Music Score Library Project
SRC
Sonia Ray Catalog. Catalog of Brazilian Works for the Double Bass.
LICA
Long Island Composers Alliance
ACF
American Composers Forum
NYWC
New York Women Composers Inc.
PMC
Polish Music Centre
PN
Paul Nemeth website
AMC
Australian Music Centre
CMC
Canadian Music Centre
FAC
Fondazione Adkins Chiti
ix
ACA
American Composers Alliance
SOUNZ
Centre for New Zealand Music
BNF
Bibliothèque Nationale de France
IMC
Icelandic Music Information Centre
JFC
Japan Federation of Composers
BMC
British Music Collection
LCP
IAWM
Women in Music
NML
Living Composer Project International Alliance for New Music Online Library
KPV
Kapralova Society
X
CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION
Roughly fifteen years ago, Andrew Kohn, professor of double bass at West Virginia
University, published a list of women composers in Bass World, the magazine issued by the International Society of Bassists, raising awareness in regards to gender inclusion in the instrument's repertoire.¹ Kohn's list included approximately two hundred names of women composers and raises the following questions: (1) “what are specific gendered views of music?”, (2) “are there feminine views of the bass and feminine sorts of compositions for the bass?”, (3) "are there feminine bassists or feminine cultural systems involving the bass?", and (4) "what have women contributed to the bass?” These are all legitimate questions. Historical gender inequality has surrounded women composers' careers and the role that gender plays for instruments such as the double bass, low brass, and percussion. Kohn's list registers only two works dated before 1900 and it is noticeable how expansive it becomes when it approaches the present, exemplifying the growing acceptance of women composers in classical music and shifting attitudes toward the double bass.
Kohn's publication in Bass World has been a great source of inspiration for this study, which started as an attempt to compile and discover pieces for one of my DMA recitals, a performance conceived to feature only female composers of music for the bass. The process of finding reliable references to pieces and recordings was not easy, and it made me question the importance of the accessibility of scores in fueling diverse choices in music making. Kohn's list was a very important part of my research process for that recital, and it is absolutely pertinent to
1 Andrew Kohn, "List of Compositions by Women for the Double Bass," Bass World 27, no. 1 (2003): 23–28.
1
the gender issues in our bass world, providing information that furthers the discussion of the
topic of women composers.