Methodology
Andrew Kohn's list of women composers published in Bass World38 is not only a source of inspiration in this essay, but it also serves as a starting point for this catalog. Kohn's list is organized by composer's name and includes instrumentation, title, publisher and dates (if available). With the goal of facilitating the performance of and future research about these works, I expand upon Kohn's data by including country of origin and enabling access by listing OCLC (Online Computer Library Center) numbers for scores and recordings. The data for each piece will vary according to the availability of information about each composer and their work. In addition to adding data for the pieces listed by Kohn, I expand upon his list by cataloging works composed since the publication of Kohn's list or otherwise not included in his list.
According to Daniel Joudrey and Arlene Taylor, authors of the book Introduction to Cataloging and Classification, a catalog should enable the user to find, identify, and select bibliographic resources in a collection and obtain access to an item described. 39 My project aims to follow the several principles cited in this book, specifically the idea that a catalog should: (1) have authority control so that users may identify what they seek and easily navigate the system,
(2) contain enough metadata to allow users to select resources and to obtain those that they need,
38 Kohn, "List of Compositions by Women for the Double Bass," 2003.
39 Daniel N. Joudrey, Arlene G. Taylor, and David P. Miller, Introduction to Cataloging and Classification (Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2015).
15
(3) be easy to search, with clear instructions and with explanations of the comprehensiveness of a search, (4) provide accessibility to all users, regardless of whether they are sophisticated
computer users or whether they are persons who have disabilities.
A variety of annotated catalogs of music publications have been useful in helping me define the design and scope of a catalog of works for double bass by women composers. An Annotated Catalogue to Guitar Music by Female Composers40 and “A Catalogue of Viola Compositions by United States Women Composers ”41 are examples of these. These sources differ in the number and types of their indexes and several of them include publishers and library locations, but none of them provide specific WorldCat OCLC numbers. Discographies and brief biographies are only present in a few of the catalogs.
Another important catalog for this project is Judith Barger's Music in The Girl's Own Paper: An Annotated Catalogue, 1880-1910, which mentions composers of Britain in the nineteenth-century and includes additional annotations than the ones described above.42 The catalog contains stories about music compositions, illustrations, and several historical articles as an introduction to the standard chronological listing and indexes. In this case, annotations are an important feature as they provide the researcher with contextual information and reliable references about the works.
The structure of this catalog for double bass has a similar approach in format to that used in Heidi Boenke's Flute Music by Women Composers: An Annotated Catalog.43 It includes a
40 Janna MacAuslan and Kristan Aspen, Guitar Music by Women Composers: An Annotated Catalog (Westport, CT: Music Reference Collection, 1997).
41 Marta Zweben, "A Catalog of Viola Compositions by United States Women Composers" (DMA diss., University of Miami, 2002).
42 Judith Barger, Music in The Girl's Own Paper: An Annotated Catalogue, 1880–1910 (New York, NY: Taylor & Francis, 2016).
43 Heidi M. Boenke, Flute Music by Women Composers: An Annotated Catalog (New York, NY: Music Reference Collection, 1988).
16
main alphabetical list with information about the works, followed by a title index, chronological index, geographical index and instrumentation index, dividing the works in solos, duos, trios, quartets, and quintets. This option of diverse indexes not only promotes accessibility, but also enough preliminary information that would help the performer to make a decision to perform a specific piece or a composer. Finally, this catalog also contains lists of publishers' information, composers' information, and a supplementary list of recordings, limited to albums that include pieces cited in the catalog.
The main alphabetical list of works includes the mandatory fields of (1) composer, (2) title, (3) instrumentation, and (4) source. A list of names is included in the Appendix section of this dissertation, mentioning the relevant persons encountered through this research that do not meet the mandatory fields or that could not be verified through references. The supplementary fields in this catalog are: dates, annotations, playing techniques, technical requirements, publisher, style or genre, technique level, commission, dedication, recording, OCLC number and online suggested recordings. Besides my own understanding about each piece, the annotations include when available, subtitles, premiere information, name of movements, form, main characteristics, tuning, type of notation, alternative instrumentation, editor's name, authorship of text or poetry, awards, score type (manuscript), and links to external sources. The catalog presented in this document is the first stage of an ongoing research project. A searchable online version of this catalog is maintained and updated at www.rebecafurtado.com.
It is important to mention that the designation of technique level is relative and was used infrequently in this catalog. The levels are broadly divided into Beginner, Intermediate and Advanced. The beginner level incorporates method books and pieces for young bassists that go up to fourth position. The Intermediate level includes pieces with well-developed melodic
17
material in traditional notation and moderate use of thumb position. Lastly, the Advanced level
includes multitask pieces with use of extended techniques and complex rhythmic structures.
In order to facilitate future research, this dissertation includes WorldCat OCLC references. With the use of these numbers, a researcher can encounter a specific piece on WorldCat database, find extra information about the works, and determine which libraries own a copy. In addition, the OCLC numbers facilitate transactions of Interlibrary Loan between universities and libraries around the world, which will help performers access to the material presented in this catalog.
18