The Issue of Women Composers
In 2018, forty-five significant music festivals from the European Union and Canada,
including the BBC's Proms, announced that by 2022 they will achieve a 50/50 balance in gender representation of composers whose works are commissioned and performed in their conferences. This initiative, called Keychange, aims to empower women and “to create much needed long- term change in live music and beyond.”11 Canada and the United Kingdom have become pioneers in disseminating women composers' music and publicizing commitments to diversity throughout their commissioning guidelines and universities' curricula.
While practical solutions are being promoted all over the world, we should acknowledge that the issue of gender inclusion is much bigger, and its lack stems from many societal factors that shaped and limited women's careers throughout the history of Western music. Most of these concepts were established or reinforced in the nineteenth century, such as differentiated education and job opportunities based on gender. 12 These factors have been the challenges to the success of female composers and to the acceptance of their voice.
The ideological construction of gendered roles and stereotypes has affected women composers throughout the years. Several examples can be used to illustrate this issue, but the clearest one is probably George Upton's book, Women in Music, which he published in 1880.13 Upton discusses the concerns that arose in Europe in the nineteenth century when women started
to aim for professionalism and to craft artful compositions. Upton was worried that with the
11 "45 International Music Festivals And Conferences Pledge To Tackle Gender Inequality,” Keychange blog, accessed April 2018. http:/keychange.eu/blog/45-international-music-festivals-conferences-pedge-tackle-gender- inequality/
12 Carol Neuls-Bates, ed., Women in Music: An Anthology of Source Readings (Boston: Northeastern University Press, 1996) 91-297
13 George Upton, Women in Music, 2nd ed. (Chicago: A. C. McClurg, 1886) 206-210.
8
feminization of music there would be an inevitable deterioration of the art. According to Upton, women are naturally emotional and act through it, not being able to project themselves outwardly. "When the emotions lose their force with age, her musical power weakens,”14 he argues to justify the fact that women reach results mainly by intuition and they drop music before having gray hair, while men retain their abilities into old age. By believing that women's and men's brains are actually different, women were discouraged from having their own voices and to be creators, instead, they were encouraged to contribute to the success of the men around them, as supporters, sources of consolation, and inspiration as muses.
Another important example of diminishing women's capacities can be seen in the writing of Carl E. Seashore. After Upton's essay and other similar literature, psychologists started to try to understand and scientifically explain psychological differences between men and women. In 1940, Seashore acknowledged that all of the characteristics considered important for composition such as intelligence, creative imagination, endurance and temperament are the same for all humans, but he still believed in the idea of the “eternal feminine” in which the nature of women is passive, while the masculine nature is persistent and rational.15 These concepts are present in the way society organized women's education and obligations such as marriage and motherhood.
Furthermore, according to Nancy B. Reich, in the post-revolutionary world “women lost power. "16 For example, in 1804 the limitation of property rights to women and the ideas of motherhood and morality reinforced the concept that women were property of their husbands.
This "Cult of Domesticity,” as Reich terms this limitation on women's roles in society, allowed
14 George Upton, “A Classic Formulation of the Theory of Women's Innate Inferiority,” in Neuls-Bates, Women in Music, 207.
15 Carl E. Seashore, “Why No Great Women Composers?” in Neuls-Bates, Women in Music, 297-302.
16 Nancy B. Reich, "Women as Musicians: A Question of Class" in Musicology and Difference: Gender and Sexuality
in Music Scholarship, ed. Ruth A. Solie, (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993), 131.
9
women to execute, but not create.17 Such viewpoints impacted education, where teachers often took interest in the work of men, while women were encouraged to develop purely domestic skills. This gendered education model impacted curricula at the Paris Conservatory where women could only study two years in harmony, while men could take three years. It is not surprising that teaching jobs for women were not available in the composition area as well. Louise Farrenc, a remarkable nineteenth-century composer, could only work at the conservatory as a piano teacher, and then only in the women's section. According to Reich, in 1850, Farrenc had to ask for equal salary as a teacher in the Paris Conservatory. 18
A little later in 1933, Dame Ethel Smyth, a remarkable feminist English composer, wrote about women's “spiritual difficulties” indicating the extreme isolation of women composers. Smyth commented that “on a talented girl composer, the backwater frequenters will turn an indifferent, a patronizing, and perhaps inimical gaze.”19 This perspective shows the discouragement that young composers had at this time, and it represents the extra challenge that women have had to overcome in order to become professional composers.
A discussion regarding gender aesthetics in music criticism is likewise present in Women in Music: An Anthology of Source Readings. This type of criticism carries stereotypes in terms of gender, for example, the term feminine is what women should cultivate in music, which is the grateful, delicate, fuller melody and smaller forms of song. The term masculine should be powerful and intellectually rigorous in harmony, counterpoint and structural logic. A musical example can be seen in criticism to the 1896 premiere of Amy Beach's Gaelic Symphony in
Boston. Besides the fact that many critics mentioned that the piece was “creditable work for a
17 Ibid., 132.
18 Ibid., 137.
19 Ethel Smith, “Female Pipings in Eden” in Neuls-Bates, 294.
10
woman, ,”20 musical critics from Boston registered that she probably had feelings of inferiority as
a female composer since there was a “excessive heavy orchestration,” claiming that Beach “must
be virile at any cost.”21 In this case, music becomes an inevitable result of her gender.
In her article, “Gender, Professionalism and the Musical Canon," Marcia J. Citron furthers this discussion observing that “large forms hold greater value than small forms, which are typically regarded as feminine.”22 Citron argues that it is not only necessary to promote women and incorporate female composers in the canon, but a larger structural change in our music education is needed. For that, we must look for a humanistic approach to musical studies, while trying to resist to a positivist way of understanding music. In this model, sociological, cultural, and historical approaches should be taken into consideration in developing a contextually-based, community-engaged musical society.
In order to challenge the idea that works by women composers are “unworthy of consideration for serious performance and study"23, we should be proactive in fueling inclusion of this repertoire. Otherwise, we risk “reinforce[ing] the inaccurate notion that there were no relevant pieces by women and doing so, might render more difficulty for women to emerge as creators in the future. "24