Richer, Jeannine
Jeux
Date of Publication: 1993
Instrumentation: db; pf
Duration: 3'
Publisher: Gerard Billaudot Editeur/Collection Panorama
Number of Performers: 2
Annotations: The tempo for this piece is very flexible. Strong use of extended techniques. A moment of
improvisation is dedicated to the double bass in the end where the composer indicates direction and the use of tremolo, ending with a descending dynamic to ppp.
Playing Techniques: trill; hit the wood; pizz; gliss; gliss of harmonics; trem.; chords; harmonics; sfz; app; s.p.; "cordler"; "shot"
Technique Level: Advanced
OCLC number: 32843587
Source: OCLC; SC
155
Ligne Interrompue
Date of Composition: 1974 Instrumentation: db; narr Duration: 5'
Publisher: Editions Gemeaux
Number of Performers: 2
Annotations: This piece contains a varied notation, sometimes the measures are marked in, sometimes not. There are pictures to inform specific techniques and which specific parts of the bass the sound should be produced by the performer. The composer affirms that the tempo overall should not be fixed, but rather, free to interpretation and flexible according to the mood of the passage. The piece sometimes shows the maximum duration of seconds for a certain passage. The voice part has sections A, B, and C, that are applied during free from pulsation moments. Playing Techniques: pizz; chords; s.p.; sfz; bridge; trem.; vibrato; app; art. harmonics; nat. harmonics; jete; gliss accelerando; gliss with harmonics; snap pizz; tailpiece, wood.
Technical Requirements: mute
Technique Level: Advanced
Source: SC
Piege I
Date of Composition: 1979
Instrumentation: db
Duration: 5'
Publisher:
Number of Performers: 1
Annotations: Jeannine Richer composed a set of pieces named "Piege". She has "Piege" I and IV dedicated to bass (solo and duo) and II is a quintet that includes bass. This score contains graphic notation and no specific measures. All the instructions are in French. It is a rich piece that explores extended techniques, interpretation, and improvisation. The piece is a path to inexistance (or destruction of the instrument itself) and it follows four different stages: Precision, Choice, Liberty and Absence.
Playing Techniques: gliss; trem.; s.p.; pizz; nat. harmonics; art. harmonics; silent fingering; tapping on wood; sfz Technique Level: Advanced
Source: SC
Piege II
Date of Composition: 1980
Instrumentation: vn(2); va; vc; db
Number of Performers: 5
Source: AC
Piege IV
Date of Composition: 1981
Instrumentation: db (2)
Duration: 12'
Number of Performers: 2
Annotations: Db one tunned in C and db two tunned in Db. Instructions in French. Source: BNF; SC
Epiphonies
Date of Composition: 1971
Instrumentation: db (4)
Number of Performers: 4
Source: AC
156