Statement of Purpose
The purpose of this project is to compile and publish a comprehensive catalog of works by women composers for the double bass. With the idea of facilitating future research, urging diversity and calling attention to the need for gender inclusion in the double bass repertoire, this comprehensive catalog includes extra features such as WorldCat OCLC reference numbers and recording references. My goal is to provide a catalog that helps the reader to easily encounter pieces according to instrumentation, style, title, region, and chronological order. The catalog is also contextualized by three case studies of three selected composers, whose outputs represent different styles of musical material and treatment of the instrument.
The issue of gender inequality is aggravated specifically in the double bass world due to the fact that players of the instrument have historically been predominately men, and most of the techniques and repertoire developed for the double bass were standardized by men. Although the number of female bass players has increased significantly in the past twenty to thirty years, it is still very difficult to find women bassists in professional orchestras, holding academic positions, or as finalists in large scale competitions. It is of additional concern that this lack of representation might be associated with the fact that it is very rare to encounter bass performances that include the compositions of a woman. As bassists, we are not diverse enough
in our choice of repertoire, and this misrepresentation causes the continuing idea that there are
2 For example, the winners of the International Society of Bassists Double Bass Competition, which has been offered roughly every other year since 1988, are overwhelmingly men. See “ISB Double Bass Performance Competition - Past Winners," International Society for Bassists, accessed March 11, 2019, https://www.isbworldoffice.com/performance-past-winners.asp.
2
not good enough works composed by women.³ This catalog is an effort to overcome this
gendered gap resulting from the exclusion of women composers from the standard repertoire of works for the double bass.
By providing access to reliable information about composers, scores, and recordings, this dissertation provides information that has been neglected in the instrument's performance settings and encourages future generations to explore a diverse approach in their recitals and curriculum development. This catalog and the promotion of gender diversity in the double bass world represent only a first step to achieving full inclusion of women composers in the Western classical music tradition.