lowa Research Online
An annotated catalog of works by women composers for the double bass
Tavares Furtado, Rebeca
https://iro.uiowa.edu/esploro/outputs/doctoral/An-annotated-catalog-of-works-by/9983776851102771/filesAndLinks?index=0
Tavares Furtado, R. (2019). An annotated catalog of works by women composers for the double bass [University of lowa]. https://doi.org/10.17077/etd.ie8b-jmt8
https://iro.uiowa.edu Free to read and download
Copyright © 2019 Rebeca Tavares Furtado Downloaded on 2025/02/26 07:42:02 -0600
AN ANNOTATED CATALOG OF WORKS BY WOMEN COMPOSERS FOR THE DOUBLE BASS
by
Rebeca Tavares Furtado
An essay submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the Doctor of Musical Arts
degree in Music in the Graduate College of The University of Iowa
May 2019
Essay Supervisors: Professor Volkan Orhon and Associate Professor Trevor Harvey
Copyright by
REBECA TAVARES FURTADO
2019
All Rights Reserved
To my parents, Elizete de Almeida Tavares and Helio Furtado Junior
ii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to thank Volkan Orhon for his support and advice in this essay. His musicality inspired me to study abroad and his kindness, knowledge and professionalism inspired me to pursue my doctorate degree in double bass performance at the University of Iowa.
My gratitude to Trevor Harvey, for being an extremely thoughtful and attentive advisor in this dissertation, for encouraging my critical thinking, and for empowering new perspectives in my career. Thank you!
My acknowledgments to the committee members: Christine Rutledge, Marian Wilson Kimber, and David Gompper, for their support and helpful insights.
To Andrew Kohn, who kindly shared his research materials with me.
To Katie Buehner, Amy McBeth, and Melissa Moll who helped me to collect and
organize my data, and to Jessica Lu, who designed the online version of this catalog.
To Violeta Dinescu, for sharing her music and sources of inspiration.
Writing this dissertation was an enriching and challenging process. I could not have done
it without the emotional support from my wonderful parents Elizete and Helinho, my brother Pedro and my Grande Família. I am very thankful to all my friends from the South and North Hemispheres, and to my first double bass teacher, Valdir Claudino, for teaching me perseverance and empathy in music.
iii