Violeta Dinescu – Quarz Spiele, Mathematics and Romanian Folk
"One can dream in sounds. Then one can experience how sounds already exists within oneself. I try to bring to life these sounds which have already existed for a long time and are only inaudible for others." Violeta Dinescu 61
Inspired by sounds of her homeland in Romania, Violeta Dinescu frequently seeks artistic inspiration in poetry, visual arts, nature, and folk music. She studied mathematics and frequently explores compositional techniques based on mathematically analytical processes, seeking a coexistence between “strict construction and sensuousness of sound.”62 The music of Dinescu has often been described as spiritual, in association with “cosmic and sacred fields of energy.
963
Dinescu was born in Bucharest and studied piano, composition and music pedagogy at the Ciprian Porumbescu Conservatory under influential names in Romanian music such as Myriam Marbe, Emilia Comișel, and Alexandru Pașcanu. She is now the Professor for Applied Composition at the Carl von Ossietzky University in Oldenburg, Germany, where she initiated the Composer's Colloquium in 1996 and the Archive for East European Music in 2000. In addition, she leads composition workshops across Europe and North America, and promotes lectures on themes connected with Romanian music.
The catalog of compositions by Dinescu is extensive; she has composed ballets, silent- film music, music theatee, and pieces for large and small ensembles. Her instrumental works are conceptual, and they are sometimes adapted to different instruments. Such is the case for her compositions Abendandacht and Lytaniae, both of which are included in this catalog. The former piece was originally composed for trumpet and the latter for cello. However, both of these pieces
can be played on the double bass. Dinescu has received numerous awards for her work, and it
61 Violeta Dinescu, Lytaniae fur Celli, with Marcel Spinei (violoncello), Gutingi 251, 2014, compact disc. 62 Violeta Dinescu, Etudes de nuages, with Marie-Claudine Papadopoulos (violine), Gutingi 259, 2018, compact disc.
63 Dinescu, Lytaniae fur Celli.
29
has been recorded by Trio Contraste, cellist Marcel Spinei, and violinist Marie-Claudine
Papadopoulos.
The work of Dinescu is the topic of the book edited by Eva-Maria Houben, Violeta Dinescu, which discusses ideas of interpretation, notation, and artistic inspiration in her music.64 Additionally, the magazine Neue Zeitschrift für Musik published articles about her in two consecutive years (2001 and 2002). The first one, written by Dagmar Zurek, deals with the duality of mathematics and aesthetics present in her music, and the second, by Karin Meesman, brings perspectives about new music and references to some of her pieces (Echoes I and II, among others). 65 The sources cited above are in German, even though her music has been thoroughly performed and recorded around the world, Dinescu's academic literature in English is unfortunately rare.
The style of composition investigated in Dagmar Zurek's article was further explored in the liner notes to Dinescu's album, Etudes de nuages (2008), in which Egbert Hiller66 establishes two sides in her music: the use of mathematics and the influence of Romanian history or folk music. According to Hiller, there is a “fascinating combination of structural thought, and points of contact with old traditions” in Dinescu's music. These two sides are not in conflict, but rather work together to enrich the music of Violeta Dinescu.
Specifics of this duality can be found in Dinescu's Lytaniae für Celli,67 an album recorded in 2014 by cellist Marcel Spinei. From the mathematical point of view, this is a piece
that was written for a five-string cello and has nine sections, each section composed for a
64 Eva-Maria Houben, ed., Violeta Dinescu (Saarbrücken: Pfau, 2004).
65 Dagmar Zurek, "Elements of Truth: Violeta Dinescu's Music between Aesthetics and Mathematics," Neue Zeitschrift Fur Musik 162, no. 1 (2001): 28-29. Karin Meesman, “A Fine Address: The 15th Edition of the 'Weingartener Tage Fur Neue Musik' with Violeta Dinescu,” Neue Zeitschrift Fur Musik 163, no. 1 (2002): 58-59. 66 Dinescu, Etudes de nuages.
67 The piece Lytaniae has been adapted for double bass and for viola.
30
different number of cellos from three to fifty-three (featuring only prime numbers). In addition, Dinescu used Gerhard Richter's 66 paintings as a source of inspiration by meticulously measuring free planes in the paintings and equating millimeters with quarter-tones in certain parts of her music. Her idea was to approach degrees of intensity in music based on visual aspects of color and depth.
While mathematics is clearly utilized in the piece, Dinescu also searched for inspiration in sounds of the past of her homeland. Lytaniae uses an anonymous litany from the Codex Caioni collection from the Franciscan monk Ioan Căianu (Janus Cajoni or Johannes Kajoni), who lived in the seventeenth century in Romania. The collection contains sacred and secular pieces from western Europe and Transylvania, and it had been lost since World War II, and was only re-discovered in 1985.
Dinescu has conducted fieldwork throughout Romania in conjunction with ethnomusicologist Emilia Comișel, and she claims to have a strong connection with her homeland, even though she immigrated to Germany at a young age in 1982. According to Egbert Hiller, 68 aspects of what she experienced in Romania created a sense of identity for her, which reflects on the language of the sounds she has internalized. She draws upon these sounds in her compositions through a process of “intuitive access”69 to the internalized sounds, or what she calls, "living creatures."70 In this process, Dinescu makes use of folk music not necessarily as direct quotations, but rather, in an intuitive level, “located beyond nostalgia and romantic tendencies."71
68 Dinescu, Lytaniae fur Celli.
69 Ibid.
70 Ibid.
71 Dinescu, Etudes de nuages.
31
Besides the nine pieces annotated in this catalog, Dinescu has written several other works
that include the double bass within larger ensembles, for example, Aïon; Du fond de mon Avenir; and Tempo di Walzer II. Her major work for the instrument is, perhaps, her double bass concerto, Quarz Spiele auf der Suche nach Mozart. The piece features careful treatment of the instrument, good orchestration, and musicianship. Quarz Spiele was composed for double bassist Thierry Roggen, who premiered the piece on a tour with the Bavarian Philharmonie through Switzerland, Austria, and Germany in January of 2010. According to Dinescu, the piece functions as a psychogram of different stones with echoes of Mozart. The seven stones are the titles of each movement of the concert: Trystin, Prasiolith, Quarzglas, Tridimyt, Schwingquarz, Dacit, and
Reliefschnitt in Amethyst.
The piece was written to be played in BEAD (high D) tuning, which is something bassist Roggen has explored before in his performances, compositions, and arrangements.72 The tempo should be mostly free, and there are moments in which the rhythmic structures can be flexible, without the implied limits of notated measures. However, in order to avoid an absolute freedom of rhythm, there is often a “hierarchy" of note values, which is demonstrated in the notes of the score.
The double bass part is extremely active and technically demanding, with frequent use of artificial harmonics, glissando, and chromaticism. Although there is plenty of room for creativity and interpretation in this piece, the notation clearly specifies articulations and extended techniques throughout, with the use of a diverse and carefully defined symbology. For example, there are four types of vibrato intensity and tremolo intensity, and five types of contact point for the bow.
72 More information about Roggen's use of scordatura: www.roggenmusic.com.
32
Quarz Spiele auf der Suche nach Mozart is a significant contribution to the double bass
repertoire. It is perhaps one the first concertos written to be played in the scordatura BEAD on the double bass, and it demonstrates a distinct vision of the possibilities of the instrument, while exploring a contemporary language and rich treatment of sounds, not only for the double bass, but for the orchestra as an ensemble.
Ultimately, Violeta Dinescu is a remarkable composer who developed her own artistic language through her sense of identity and close relationship with mathematics. She is inspired by abstract art and brings unique sounds to her pieces. Dinescu shows affectionate treatment of the double bass through the composition of a concerto dedicated for the instrument and a diverse set of chamber music works including the double bass.