S F | A GUBAIDULINA
С. Губашше
இ
SIKORSKI MUSIKVERLAGE HAMBURG
SIK 4/5611
CONTENTS
PREFACE..
7
AWARDS AND PRIZES.
8
VORWORT
10
ORCHESTRAL WORKS
11
WORKS FOR CHAMBER ORCHESTRA / ENSEMBLE. 29
CHAMBER MUSIC
36
VOCAL MUSIC.
55
OCCASIONAL WORKS.
63
ALPHABETICAL INDEX.
65
DISCOGRAPHY.
SIKORSKI MUSIKVERLAGE
20139 HAMBURG
phone: (+ 49) (0)40 / 41 41 00-0 · fax: (+ 49) (0)40 / 41 41 00-41
www.sikorski.de contact@sikorski.de
24 NOVEMBER 2021
COVER PHOTO VIKTOR SUSLIN
5
74
“To my mind the ideal relationship to tradition and to new compositional techniques is the one in which the artist has mastered both the old and the new, though in a way which makes it seem that he is taking note of neither the one nor the other. There are composers who construct their works very consciously; I am one of those who ‘cultivate' them. And for this reason everything I have assimilated forms as it were the roots of a tree, and the work its branches and leaves. One can indeed describe them as being new, but they are leaves nonetheless, and seen in this way they are always traditional and old. Dmitri Shostakovich and Anton Webern have had the greatest influence on my work. Although my music bears no apparent traces of it, these two composers taught me the most important lesson of all: to be myself."
Sofia Gubaidulina
„Als Ideal betrachte ich ein solches Verhältnis zur Tradition und zu neuen Kompositi- onsmitteln, bei dem der Künstler alle Mittel – sowohl neue als auch traditionelle – be- herrscht, aber so, als schenke er weder den einen noch den anderen Beachtung. Es gibt Komponisten, die ihre Werke sehr bewusst bauen, ich zähle mich dagegen zu denen, die ihre Werke eher,züchten'. Und darum bildet die gesamte von mir aufgenommene Welt gleichsam die Wurzeln eines Baumes und das daraus gewachsene Werk seine Zweige und Blätter. Man kann sie zwar als neu bezeichnen, aber es sind eben dennoch Blätter, und unter diesem Gesichtspunkt sind sie immer traditionell, alt.
Den größten Einfluss auf meine Arbeit hatten Dmitri Schostakowitsch und Anton We- bern. Obwohl dieser Einfluss in meiner Musik scheinbar keine Spuren hinterlassen hat, ist es doch so, dass mich diese beiden Komponisten das Wichtigste gelehrt haben: ich selbst zu sein. “
Sofia Gubaidulina
PREFACE
Sofia Gubaidulina was born in Chistopol in the Tatar Republic in 1931. She studied the piano (with Grigory Kogan) and composition, and graduated from the Kazan Conservatory in 1954. Until 1959 she studied composition at the Moscow Conservatory with Nikolai Peiko, Shostakovich's assistant, and then did postgraduate work under Vissarion Shebalin. She has been active as a composer since 1963. In 1975, together with Viktor Suslin and Vyacheslav Artyomov, she founded the 'Astreya' Ensemble, which specialized in improvi- sing on rare Russian, Caucasian, Central Asian and East Asian folk and ritual instruments. These hitherto unknown sounds and timbres and ways of experiencing musical time had a profound influence on her creative work. After an interval of several years, Sofia Gubai- dulina and Viktor Suslin revived the idea of the 'Astraea' Ensemble in the 1990s. In 1992 Gubaidulina moved to Germany, and now lives near Hamburg. Since the early 1980s, and especially as a result of the support and encouragement given to her by Gidon Kremer, her works have been performed widely in western countries. With Schnittke, Denisov and Silvestrov, she is now seen to be one of the leading representatives of the New Music in the former Soviet Union. This is reflected in numerous commissions from the BBC, the Berlin Festival, the Library of Congress, NHK, The New York Philharmonic and other insti- tutions, and in the availability of a large number of CDs. Sofia Gubaidulina is a member of the Akademie der Künste in Berlin, of the Freie Akademie der Künste in Hamburg, of the Royal Music Academy in Stockholm, of the German order ‘Pour le mérite' and Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Letters. She was honoured with numerous awards and prizes. Sofia Gubaidulina was nominated ‘Capell-Compositrice' of Sächsische Staatskapelle Dresden for the concert seasons 2014/2015 and 2016/2017.
Although Sofia Gubaidulina's education and background are Russian, it is important to bear in mind the significance of her Tatar origins. However, she is not a Romantic nationa- list. Her compositional mastery enables her to make use of contemporary techniques evol- ved by the European and American avant-garde, though in a wholly individual manner. Furthermore, oriental philosophies have had an influence on certain aspects of her music.
A striking feature of Gubaidulina's work is the almost total absence of ‘absolute' music. The vast majority of her pieces have an extra-musical dimension, e.g. a poem, either set to music or hidden between the lines, a ritual, or some kind of instrumental 'action'. Some of her compositions demonstrate her preoccupation with mystical ideas and Christian symbolism. She has wide-ranging literary interests, and has set to music poems by ancient Egyptian and Persian writers and contemporary lyric poetry by Marina Tsvetayeva, for whom she feels a deep spiritual affinity.
7