K A T | A CHEMBERDIL TCHEMBERDJI
SIKORSKI MUSIKVERLAGE HAMBURG
SIK 4/5637
CONTENTS
PREFACE (ENGLISH)
6
EINLEITUNG (IDEUTSCH)
8
BÜHNENWERKE
10
ORCHESTERWERKE
11
KAMMERMUSIK
15
KLAVIERMUSIK
24
VOKALMUSIK
26
FILMMUSIK
29
MUSIK FÜR KINDER
31
BEARBEITUNGEN
33
INDEX
35
SIKORSKI MUSIKVERLAGE
20139 HAMBURG
phone: (+ 49) (0)40 / 41 41 00-0 · fax: (+ 49) (0)40 / 41 41 00-41
www.sikorski.de contact@sikorski.de
3. NOVEMBER 2016
COVER PHOTO O ANGELA ZOHLEN
5
KATIA TCHEMBERDJI
KATIA TCHEMBERDJI
COMPOSER AND PIANIST
Katia Tchemberdji was born in Moscow in 1960. Already at the age of seven she was ad- mitted to Central School of Music of the Moscow Conservatory, at which she continued studies in the subjects of composition, music theory and piano. Her most important te- achers were the Professors Nikolai Korndorf, Yuri Cholopov, Samuel Alumian and Sergei Balassanian.
Katia Tchemberdji completed all her examinations with honours in 1984. Her diplomas in composition and music theory enabled her to teach various theoretical subjects as well as piano and composition. From 1984 until 1990 she taught at the Gnessin Music Academy in Moscow. Katia Tchemberdji was accepted into the Composers' Union of the Soviet Union in 1986. She has lived and worked in Berlin since 1990.
In equal demand as a composer and pianist, Katia Tchemberdji has received numerous invitations to international chamber music festivals, including the Kuhmo Chamber Music Festival. In addition, she has made guest appearances at the Berlin Festival (1991), the Ber- lin Music Biennale (1993), the Zurich New Music Days (1992), the Lerchenborg Music Days, Denmark (1994), the Festival ‘Russian Moderns' in Ulm (1996), the International Oleg Kagan Music Festivals in Kreuth, Heidelberg Spring and many other renowned musical events. Katia Tchemberdji has repeatedly been composer in residence at the International Cham- ber Music Course of the Thuringian Summer Academy in Böhlen. During recent years, Tchemberdji has made a name for herself as a composer for television and cinema films.
Alongside her numerous appearances as a soloist, she has worked in various chamber mu- sic formations with Boris Pergamenchikov, Natalia Gutman, Eduard Brunner, Alexander Melnikov, the Britten Quartet and many others. During the years 1996-2002, Katia Tchem- berdji made a series of recordings with piano works of Bartók, Prokofiev, Glinka, Medtner and others for DeutschlandRadio.
Katia Tchemberdji has received numerous composition commissions from renowned mu- sicians and organisers, including the Hilliard Ensemble, the Munich Chamber Orchestra, the Scharoun Ensemble, the Comic Opera in Berlin and the Sing-Akademie in Berlin. Her oeuvre, consisting primarily of chamber works, has received many highly recognised performances in Tokyo, New York, London, Salzburg, Zurich, Berlin and Moscow, among
6
other places. The world premiere of her cantata Cantus controversus for soprano, baritone, male choir, chamber orchestra and percussion ensemble (based on Psalms 76 and 77 and texts by Albert Einstein) on 2 July 1997 at Loccum Monastery Church was an overwhelming success, as was the world premiere of her chamber opera Max and Mo- ritz (based on Wilhelm Busch) on 8 October 1999 in Stadthagen. In 2005 Katia Tchember- dji was awarded the prize of the International Competition for Women Composers 'musica femina'. In 2007, Chemberdji's children's opera Save Pluto! was performed with great success by Berlin children and youths.
Katia Tchemberdji has worked together with the Academy of Music and Theatre in Ha- nover for a considerable period of time and also with the Academy of Music in Detmold, where she offers seminars for composition and new music for the furtherance of young talent. During the course of her pedagogical work she has developed interesting and in- novative methods of teaching composition for children and youths, and a number of her pupils have been honoured with furtherance prizes. Composition pupils from her class have repeated won first prizes at the competition 'Jugend komponiert' [Young People Composing]. In music theoretical and practical elementary teaching (piano), she develo- ped the patented ‘key ruler' which literally makes tone structures (chords, intervals, melo- dies, major and minor scales, twelve-tone rows) ‘graspable', in every since of the word, for very small children starting at age 3 or 4.
7