BLOND ECKBERT
A dark tale based on the novella by the German Romantic Ludwig Tieck.
Eckbert and his wife Berthe live in seclusion in the Harz Mountains. One stormy night, Eckbert's friend Walther arrives and, to while away the time, Berthe tells him her life story. Walther mysteriously knows a great deal about Berthe's early life and Eckbert's suspicions grow, eventually leading him to murder Walther during a hunting expedition. Consumed by terror and suspicion, Eckbert retreats into seclusion and revisits the fairy-tale scenes of Berthe's childhood, accompanied by a magical singing bird. He encounters the old woman who raised Berthe, and at last learns the terrible truth about Walther, Berthe, and himself.
Blond Eckbert
(1993) 75 MINS
♫
Commissioned by English National Opera with funds provided by the Geoffrey C. Hughes Charitable Trust
Libretto (English) by the composer
Soprano, Mezzo soprano, Tenor, Baritone
SATB chorus
2(pic).2(ca).2(bcl).2(cbn)/4.3.2+btbn.0/timp.perc/hp/str
"...an accessible modern classic...” Independent on Sunday
Blond Eckbert
Pocket Version
(2006) 60 MINS
Commissioned by The Opera Group and Sequitur
Libretto (English) by the composer, also available in German translation by
Alexander Gruber and Frank Harders-Wuthenow
Soprano, Mezzo soprano, Tenor, Baritone
0.1.2(bcl).0/2000/hp/2vn.2vc
"...the piece sparkles with a magical, luminous charm."
The Guardian
♫
8
OPERAS BY JUDITH WEIR
Act 1
Spoken:
1, actone. It is the year 1066.
for Jane Manning (1979)
KING HARALD'S SAGA
King Harald's Saga, actone. It is In the royal palace at Oslo, King Harald of Norway Iming recounts his previous triumphs on the field of battle. To a fanfare of trumpets, Earl Tostia arrives from England. Tostig is a traitor. He persuades King Harald to inrade England.
Fervent, freely. =69 Harald f sempre
JUDITH WEIR
1, Harald by the grace
of almighty God
, King
و
5
of all
the northem lands, mightiest warrior that e-ver donned
a coat
of mail
and
* To be spoken normally, at moderate pace and with an even delivery, [as on a radio announcement] Copyright 1982 Novello & Company Limited
All Rights Reserved