The Consolations of Scholarship
(1985) 25 MINS
♫
Commissioned by Musicon of Durham University, with funds from the Arts Council of Great Britain
Libretto (English) by the composer
Soprano solo
1(afl,pic)111/1000/perc/pf/str(10010)
This music drama is presented in the style of a Chinese Yüan drama from the 13th/14th century. Chao Tun, a virtuous government official, is implicated in a plot against the Emperor by the ambitious and ruthless General K'an. Chao is sent a forged imperial edict to take his own life. Before doing so he tells his wife to leave the city with their newly-born son. The son is brought up by a hermit and 20 years later goes to the capital to read the neglected philosophical classics. Stumbling across a text which reveals the truth about his father's death, he sets out to exact his revenge.
Miss Fortune
(2011) 90 MINS
Commissioned by the Bregenz Festival and the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden
Libretto (English) by the composer
Soprano, 2 Mezzo Sopranos, Countertenor, Tenor, Baritone, Bass Baritone SATB chorus
2(pic).1.3(bcl).1+cbn/3130/3perc/pf/str
♫
A contemporary re-telling of a Sicilian folk story. Tina's wealthy family lose all their possessions overnight and she is thrown into a life of poverty. When her life's course turns from bad to worse, she makes a date with Fate. Her fortunes mysteriously change, and after several fortuitous happenings, she regains wealth, and, possibly, a husband.
The opera explores what it means to be rich or poor; the mysteries of everyday life; and the effects of chance, luck and accident on human existence.
"Weir is a splendidly economical composer...
(her score) unfolds with mystery and many a glint of unusual colour, felicitous twists of harmony, half-allusions that she calmly makes her own.”
The Sunday Times
10
OPERAS BY JUDITH WEIR
A Night at the Chinese Opera
(1987) 110 MINS
Commissioned by the BBC for premiere by Kent Opera
Libretto (English) by the composer
Soprano, 2 Mezzo sopranos, Countertenor, 3 Tenors, 2 Baritones, Bass, Boy (non-speaking role)
2(2pic).2.2.2/4100/2perc/pf/str
♫
13th century China in the era of Kublai Khan and Marco Polo is the setting for this three-act opera. At the heart of the drama is a re-telling of the Yuan dynasty play The Chao Family Orphan by Chi Chun-hsiang.
Chao Sun, explorer and mapmaker, leaves his city of Loyan for exile. His son Chao Lin is charged with the construction of a canal. Some actors are among his workers. The night before departure they enact The Chao Family Orphan. In the play, the wicked General Tu-an-Ku provokes the suicide of his servant Chao and his wife, leaving their young son an orphan. Unwittingly, the General adopts and raises the child. Twenty years later they conspire to overthrow the emperor. The orphan discovers his identity through a friend of his parents and vows revenge. After the play, Chao Lin's work on the canal is acclaimed. While surveying, Chao encounters an old woman who tells of his father's fate. Chao immediately plots revenge.
"Quirkily inventive and sparely elegant... it has the Stravinskian capacity to be both witty and beautiful at the same time.”
The Daily Telegraph