AN APPRECIATION
by NICK DANIEL
I
t is a great honour and a privilege that my warm and much treasured friendship with Thea has resulted in a brilliant series of pieces written for me, showing her absolute mastery and total professionalism in writing for the oboe, which flows from her deep understanding of my playing and what I want to say with the instrument.
Thea was first suggested to me by Peter Maxwell Davies as an ideal composer to write a concerto for his 1994 St Magnus Festival. He wanted specifically a woman and a Scot. Thea produced Helios, one of the most original oboe concertos ever written, which requires a mixture of virtuosity, sound painting, movement, theatre and dramatic presentation. It also contains a spine tingling musical sunrise, a summer storm and a moonrise. The oboe plays the Sun-God, and I delighted Thea by wearing a bright red Nehru collar jacket at the premiere, which happened with the Scottish Chamber Orchestra in the cinema in Kirkwall with a force 10 gale regularly intruding into the performance! I remember meeting Thea for the first time at Heathrow Airport and discussing Helios. She had drawn a 'map' of the piece, showing dramatic intention, key relationships and structure, and already, without seeing a note of written music, her highly creative and fertile imagination got me very excited. Seeing these maps of hers is always a thrill as they give me an early view into what's going to be involved. Very generously she has given me some of them. Helios was the first in a series of pieces for different settings of the instrument. This forms an important body of work for the oboe and the cor anglais, and I was delighted when the recording
1
MUSGRAVE AT 95 AN APPRECIATION
company Harmonia Mundi agreed to release almost all of Thea's chamber music for oboe on my first album with them. When you play a piece of Thea's it's almost impossible to believe she doesn't play the instrument herself, so fluid and natural is her instrumental and vocal understanding and her complete professionalism. I've heard many people say this about her writing, but at the same time, this fluidity of technique is used at the service of great inspiration and ideas. Discipline and inspiration in perfect balance.
DOGGETTS
Left: Thea Musgrave and Nick Daniel following the world premiere of Helios in Orkney, 1995. Right: Thea and Nick, 2016.
Like many great opera composers Musgrave has brought dramatic elements from the stage to her concerto forms and chamber music. These elements may be visual, involving the artists to move or communicate visually in some way, or they may be purely musical. Being coached by her in how to present these aspects is a wonderful lesson in stagecraft. In her masterpiece for oboe and piano, Night Windows, inspired by Edward Hopper paintings, the drama is distilled into pure music with no diminishing of the dramatic effect of the music on the listener, and yet her oboe quartet, Cantilena, placed the oboe as an outsider and the string trio gradually, although at first suspiciously, welcome him into the group on stage. Thea asked for me to enter the hall some minutes after the piece had begun playing a top A!
Similarly in Two's Company for Dame Evelyn Glennie and me, she asked me to bow normally with Evelyn on entering, then immediately leave the stage, only to re-enter playing from memory on the opposite side of the Albert Hall. Quite a trot round I discovered! These motion and gestural aspects of the pieces bring the music to life in 3D for the audience and it's why, when Thea ascends the stage to bow and opens her arms in that warm way of hers, the same way she greets those of us lucky enough to be her friends, the audience's warmth is both audible and palpable. Yet Thea is as likely to drop an unexpected F Bomb as any composer I know, and in the next breath she will be telling us how she turned down a request from Tolkien to write a Lord of the Rings opera because there were just too many overtones of Wagner!
2
Photo: Kate Mount
MUSGRAVE AT 95 BIOGRAPHY