TURBULENT LANDSCAPES
(2003)
Duration: 26 Minutes
Orchestration: 3.2+ca.2+bcl.2+cbn/4.3.3.1/timp.3perc/hp/str
The turbulence of the title represents some kind of ‘event' that is wonderfully depicted in the various paintings of Turner that have been chosen for this work. Since music exists in time, there can be a 'before' and an 'after': so, in these movements the 'event' sometimes effects a major change and sometimes not. To heighten the drama, in each of the movements the protagonist is characterized by a solo player from the orchestra. There are six quite independent movements, though they share some of the same musical material. Each movement is represented by one picture of Turner except for the second movement, which has three pictures. This work was commissioned by the Boston Symphony Orchestra and is dedicated to my friends in America.
I. Sunrise with Sea Monsters
The calm sea of the early morning is ruffled by the arrival of a sea monster (tuba solo) in a playful mood. Eventually the sun rises (trumpets, an A major chord) and the monster swims off with a swish of the tail. The calm returns.
II. The Shipwreck
This movement is based on three pictures: the first one, Staffa, Fingal's Cave (1832, Yale Center for British Art) seemed an appropriate opening for this movement. The gathering storm thus has a location, and a hint of Mendelssohn was not to be resisted! The movement builds gradually and inexorably to a violent storm depicted in the picture of the title and the ship goes down.
III. Snow Storm: Hannibal and his Army crossing the Alps
A barely seen Hannibal (solo horn) urges his army (strings) forward despite the developing snow storm (percussion and flutter-tongued flutes). The journey is increasingly arduous as the snow thickens, but at last the storm clears and a distant sunny (A major) Italy is seen in the distance.
23
MUSGRAVE AT 95 ORCHESTRAL SELECTIONS
IV. War. The Exile and the Rock Limpet
In a desolate landscape the exiled Napoleon stands pensive, behind him a guard stands on alert. Here the turbulence is internal. As Napoleon (solo trumpet) contemplates a rock limpet (muted horn chord always at the same pitch) he remembers some of the events of his charismatic life and downfall: like Hannibal, the joy of his successful crossing of the Alps with his army (distant sound of La Marseillaise); later the interminable snow and the disastrous retreat from Moscow; then his thoughts turn to despair with the memory of his defeat at the battle of Trafalgar (distant sound of the British National Anthem, God Save The King) and finally his exile.
V. The Burning of the Houses of Parliament, 16th October, 1834
There are several paintings of this event and that is no wonder since it must have been spectacular to behold. As the movement begins, the scene is set: a quiet, peaceful night evoked by the bass clarinet, cor anglais and solo viola. Softly, the horns intone the British National Anthem, alluding to the location. Then, suddenly a singular flame shoots up into the sky (solo piccolo). More flames (woodwind and percussion) build to a terrible climax in which one can imagine the buildings collapsing. However, after a moment, one hears the horns very quietly resuming the National Anthem. W know that the buildings will be rebuilt.
VI. Sunrise, with a Boat between Headlands
A thick fog (big string cluster) envelops the landscape - the huge looming cliffs (muted brass chords) are hardly visible and a foghorn (2 horns) alerts a ship to the danger of collision. A lonely clarinet summons the morning sun which eventually appears (trumpets and woodwinds) and the fog evaporates. The ship is now fully revealed (strings) and sails between the cliffs (brass now unmuted) towards the open sea. The mood is tranquil as the ship disappears into the distance. There is a brief reminiscence of the sea monster.
Τ.Μ.
e
24
MUSGRAVE AT 95 ORCHESTRAL SELECTIONS