TWO'S COMPANY
(2005)
Duration: 21 Minutes
Soloists: oboe, percussion
Orchestration: 2.1+ca.2.2/3.2.2.1/hrp/str
This work was commissioned by the BBC for Evelyn Glennie and Nicholas Daniel. It was an exciting challenge to write a dramatic work for such dissimilar instruments. I decided that I would strongly dramatize this difference before bringing them harmoniously together. Thus, at the beginning of the work, the two soloists are standing as far apart as possible: the solo percussion to the conductor's right, behind the cellos, and the oboe on the opposite side behind the first violins. For each of the four ensuing sections the soloists move around the orchestra to different positions, changes that are always dramatically motivated. Throughout, the two soloists are aware of each other and play to get each other's attention, only coming together musically and physically in the very last section.
The slow first section is marked Desolate, lonely. When the oboe first enters, it responds initially to the cor anglais, and then later to a solo clarinet. This encourages the oboeist to go on stage and take a position near his fellow woodwinds, precipitating the second movement. The solo percussion, hoping to attract the oboe's attention moves to the vibraphone, which is set closer at hand.
The second section is a jaunty scherzo, mostly in 5/4 time, and for a while, it seems that the oboe responds favourably to the percussion, but then the horns attract its attention and the oboeist eventually moves so as to be close to them and the harp.
In frustration the solo percussion moves to the drums (congas, tomtoms and bongos). The third section Dramatic: furioso/espressivo is a series of confrontations. Aggressive music for the percussion (supported by strings and brass) alternates with an expressive solo oboe (accompanied by horns and harp). These alternations come ever closer together ending in a big climax. The oboe finally turns to the percussion and 'invites' the player to listen. The percussion responds and so sets the scene for both soloists to come down stage centre, bonding for the final section: Warm, leading to Passionate and finally, Exultant, a whirling coda.
Τ.Μ.
25
MUSGRAVE AT 95 INSTRUMENTAL WORKS