SIMÓN BOLÍVAR
(1992)
Libretto: Thea Musgrave, based on historical events and writings of Simón Bolívar.
(German translation by Hilary Griffiths and Claus Henneberg)
Language: English, Spanish, (Spanish version by Lillian Groag)
Duration: 2 hours 20 minutes
Soloists: 5 principals (soprano, 2 tenors, baritone, bass); 3 comprimario
(mezzo-soprano, baritone, bass); treble; 4 minor roles
Chorus: chorus
Orchestration: 2222/4331/timp.2perc/pf/hp/str
Co-commissioned by Los Angeles Music Centre and Scottish Opera
CHAMBER VERSION
(2013)
Duration: 1 Hour 45 Minutes
Soloists: 4 principals (soprano, tenor, baritone, bass-baritone); 2 comprimario (tenor, baritone); 5 bit parts and supers Orchestration: oboe (ca), clar (bs cl), bsn (dble bsn), hrn, trpt, timp (dble perc): synthesizer: vln, vla, vc
SYNOPSIS
Each generation needs its heroes: those people who can conceive of a new world and who also have the charisma, commitment and skill to bring it to reality. Thus was Bolívar. Though in his own eyes he was not successful (“those who serve a revolution only plough the sea"), for us he is a source of insight and understanding of the difficulties of achieving the goals to which he aspired. But no struggle of this nature is in vain. And we find renewal of his spirit in a few rare and wonderful people of our own time. The opera tells the story of the Venezuelan historical figure Simón Bolívar, who liberated five South American countries from Spanish colonial rule and unsuccessfully pursued their political unification under one flag. Against the tumultuous forces of the period's struggles, Bolívar emerges as a passionate idealist, brilliantly successful as a liberator (‘El Libertador’), but unable to achieve his dream for the continent. The formation of those ideals, his charisma and passions and his inability to compromise are all part of an historic process which resonates with renewed meaning in today's world.
24
Photo: courtesy of Virginia Opera
James Stewart, Earl of Moray (Jake Gardner) looks on his half-sister Mary, Queen of Scots (Ashley Putnam) in the US premiere of Mary Queen of Scots by Virginia Opera
MUSGRAVE AT 95 THE OPERAS
THE VOICE OF ARIADNE
(1974)
Libretto: Amalia Elguera, based on The Last of the Valerii by Henry James
Language: English
Duration: 1 hour 40 minutes
Soloists: 5 principals (soprano, mezzo-soprano, contralto, baritone, bass-baritone)*;
3 comprimario (2 tenors, bass-baritone)
Orchestration: 1(pic)1(ca)1(bcl)1(cbn)/1000/perc/
pf(org).hp/str(min.11111)+tape
Alternative Orchestration: 1(pic)1(ca)1(bcl)1(cbn)/1000/perc/
pf(org).hp/str(75432)
Work Notes: tape created in collaboration with Richard Rodney Bennett
Commissioned by the Royal Opera House
*Also suitable for younger operatic voices
SYNOPSIS
Count Marco Valerio and his recently married American wife invite a group of friends to witness the excavation of an antique statue on the grounds of their villa in Rome. But instead of a complete statue only a single broken-off hand and a pedestal are revealed. The pedestal carries an inscription in Greek: ‘To Ariadne’. When the Count's excitement at the prospect of the discovery yields to disappointment and depression, he thinks he hears a voice addressing him as Theseus, urging him to return to Ariadne whom, in the legend, he abandoned on the island of Naxos. The Count's forsaken wife identifies with Ariadne and gives up her claim on her husband. Her own self-sacrifice enables him to emerge from his delusions.
Critical reception to The Voice of Ariadne has been exceptional both sides of the Atlantic. William Mann in The Times (London) said of Musgrave's third opera, 'A composer needs not only technique and imagination and a special, very uncommon dramatic understanding but also a large spoonful of luck to write an opera that comes off unequivocally onstage. Most composers misfire. [She] has miraculously succeeded... [it] is a delight to listen to' Andrew Porter in the Financial Times remarked, 'the piece is very well written for singers, [it]seems almost instinctive – a mark of a born opera composer.' Following the US premiere, William Bender (Time Magazine) praised the music's ‘innocent freshness' and ‘dramatic precision'. Alan Rich of New York Magazine wrote ‘it sets the English words with remarkable attention to their shape and tone... and it doesn't waste a gesture'.
26
Musgrave's new opera is an emphatic success... Musgrave knows how to create real theatrical urgency; she is obviously a born dramatic composer.
Stanley Sadie on The Decision in Musical Times
An opera of immediate and powerful impact... in fact so clear is the emotional geography and so clear are most of the words that matter, the plot consistently makes its point.
Edward Greenfield on Harriet, The Woman Called Moses in The Guardian
Rarely since Peter Grimes have I been as impressed by the first hearing of a contemporary stage work.
Harold Rosenthal on Mary, Queen of Scots in Opera Magazine
Musgrave's decades of experience of writing every kind of music show in the precision of her craftsmanship.
Richard Dyer on The Mocking-Bird in The Boston Globe
Unstoppable dramatic momentum... the most gifted operatic composer this country has produced since Britten.
John Allison on Simón Bolívar in The Times
Musgrave is as naturally gifted a composer for the stage as anyone writing today. [‘Bolívar'] is a thrilling piece, conceived and executed on an epic scale... [She] has an infallible sense of theatrical pace and effect.
Rodney Milnes on Simón Bolívar in The Times
&
For information about Thea Musgrave's operas, choral & vocal works visit theamusgrave.com & musicsalesclassical.com
Wise Music Classical
Bergamo
G Schirmer/AMP
Berlin
G Schirmer Australia
Copenhagen
Chester Music
Hong Kong
Novello & Co
Leipzig
Alphonse Leduc
London
Edition Wilhelm Hansen
Los Angeles
Edition Peters
Madrid
Editions Transatlantiques
New York
Choudens
Paris
Le Chant du Monde
Reykjavík
Unión Musical Ediciones
Sydney
Tokyo
X
promotion@wisemusic.com wisemusicclassical.com
Cover image: Bryan Sheffield
f