THE MOCKING-BIRD
(2000)
Libretto: Thea Musgrave, after Ambrose Bierce
Language: English
Duration: 28 minutes
Soloists: baritone*
Orchestration: 1(pic)010/0000/perc/pf/str(10010) Commissioned jointly by the Serge Koussevitsky Foundation in the Library of Congress and Boston Musica Viva
*Also suitable for younger operatic voices
SYNOPSIS
War is a barbaric and primitive way of settling inevitable differences between nations and peoples, and these stories of Bierce show that, of all wars, civil war is perhaps the most devastating. He has an almost journalistic way of describing details of place and situation alongside wonderful poetic imagery; it is perhaps this style that gives his stories their evocative power. It is 1861 and, as The Mocking-Bird opens, we see a soldier, Sergeant Grayrock, on picket duty. He is lost, and fearful that he is in fact behind enemy lines... and is bitter at this situation. For him the mocking-bird is a joyful memory of his earlier years, those golden days of his youth when life was happier. Writing after the premiere in the Boston Globe, Richard Dyer remarked:
'The monodrama is a small but choice subdivision in the world of music. Now the 21st century has produced its first contender, Thea Musgrave's extraordinary anti-war parable The Mocking-Bird. [It is] a dramatic display of Musgrave's talents... the skillful writing for voice, the flexibility of the music, which moves from military tattoos through recitative, a mimicry of military voices that anticipates the appearance of the mocking-bird, to superb lyrical music of an idyllic past that tugged at the heart and already lingers in the memory.'
20
MUSGRAVE AT 95 THE OPERAS
AN OCCURRENCE AT OWL CREEK BRIDGE
(1981)
Libretto: Thea Musgrave, based on a short story by Ambrose Bierce
Language: English
Duration: 30 minutes
Soloists: baritone, actress, 2 actors*
Orchestration: 1111/1110/perc/pf/hp/str(11111)+tape
Commissioned by the BBC
Written as an opera for radio, but may be staged if given special treatment
*Also suitable for younger operatic voices
SYNOPSIS
An Occurrence at Owl Creek Bridge is based on one of the famous short stories about the American Civil War written in the late 19th century by Ambrose Bierce.
Peyton Farquhar, an Alabaman planter, has been captured by a troop of the invading Yankee army from The North. He is about to be executed for attempting to sabotage their advance. As the noose tightens round his neck he fantasises about his escape down-river and back to his wife and home.
The story puts side by side the ‘real' world of action (speech and sound effects), with the 'imaginary' world (singing) of Farquhar as he thinks, feels and remembers. The music in the orchestra is continuous; the work is truly conceived as an opera and not a play with incidental music.
21