You have written such a large body of works but as yet no symphony, is there something about that form which does not appeal to you?
Although never a symphony and that kind of formal structure, I have written many orchestral works, though usually with a dramatic element.
7
You've recently made a new reduction of your opera Mary, Queen of Scots. What was it like returning to your score, your first grand opera, now?
I loved reliving my acquaintance with this watershed opera of mine. Of course it is an entirely different process to reconceive a work you've already written to composing it in the first place. But I admit to loving every minute of it and finding new solutions for the new version with reduced forces – which means reconsidering the proportions of scenes as well as the continuity of the story.
Over a long career, unsurprisingly, your compositional style has evolved. But do you see elements of your early work in what you are creating now, or was it different work for a different era?
If I look carefully from one early work to another I can see how I got to where I am now. However, I would never have seen this from where I stood looking forward from my early works. And yet the progression matches that of my own growth and development in life, where there are always new influences and the one constant is change. Whereas the form and notes my works take might have changed over the years, I feel that what I have to say has only become clearer and truer.
Where do you compose?
In a room of one's own – as Virginia Woolf said!
You've written so much for all types of ensembles, is there anything left to write? Is there a piece of music you are burning to compose?
I truly have not really contemplated this issue – being involved even these days in three commissions that loom in front of me. I always take my deadlines seriously, and know myself well enough to know that I must stretch my commitments out even more now to avoid pressure.
C
Photo: Thomas Le Brocq
MUSGRAVE AT 95 AN INTERVIEW
Top: (left to right) Peter Mark, Thea Musgrave, David Farrar, Fred Burchinal (Scrooge in the world premiere of Musgrave's A Christmas Carol) in Central Park, New York, 1981. Bottom: Paris, 1953: The class of Nadia Boulanger (centre) at the Conservatoire with Musgrave standing in the back row.
10
MUSGRAVE AT 95 AN INTERVIEW
Top left: (left to right) Elizabeth Maconchy, Aaron Copland and Thea Musgrave on Aldeburgh beach, 1960. Top right: HRH Prince Charles presenting Thea with her Honorary Doctorate of Music. Bottom Right: Conductor Paul Goodwin, Thea Musgrave and soprano Carolyn Sampson at a rehearsal for the premiere of Journey into Light, 2005.
11
MUSGRAVE AT 95 AN INTERVIEW
G
Citi Balcor
Top: Thea conducts violist and husband Peter Mark in a rehearsal of her Viola Concerto in the Royal Albert Hall for the BBC Proms, 1973. Bottom: Thea Musgrave with Finnish Composer Kaija Saariaho following a performance by The Juilliard School's Axiom Ensemble in New York, December 2016.
12
MUSGRAVE AT 95 THE OPERAS
The
OPERAS
Thea Musgrave has that rare gift of being able to create characters who are musically as well as dramatically viable; to create and maintain dramatic tension; and to write music that is at once original and at the same time easily accessible.
Harold Rosenthal, Opera Magazine
W
ith her predilection for dramatic engagement and story-telling in her orchestral, choral, and chamber music, it is no wonder Thea Musgrave is a natural and prolific opera composer: eleven distinctive theatre pieces of all sizes blend the very best of her highly developed orchestral skills together with decades of experience writing for voice. Her stage works are notable for their powerful pacing, gripping instrumental sonorities, and soaring vocal trajectories.
The subjects of her operas are as potent and important today as when the characters lived: from the political power struggles and sexual politics of Mary, Queen of Scots and Simón Bolívar, to the heroism of Harriet Tubman confronted by racial hatred, as depicted in Harriet, The Woman Called Moses. Musgrave's operas are always thought-provoking, multi-layered, while remaining accessible, engaging visceral experiences with pure drama at their heart.
13
MUSGRAVE AT 95 THE OPERAS