MARY, QUEEN OF SCOTS
(1977)
Libretto: Thea Musgrave, based on work by Amalia Elguera
Language: English
Duration: 2 hours 12 minutes
Soloists: 4 principals (soprano, 2 tenors, baritone); 5 comprimario (soprano, tenor,
2 baritones, bass-baritone); 3 bit parts (soprano, mezzo-soprano, contralto) Chorus: chorus
Orchestration: 2(2pic)3(2ca)2(bcl)2(dbsn)/3210/timp.2perc/hp.org/str Commissioned by Scottish Opera
CHAMBER VERSION
(2016)
Duration: 2 hours 12 minutes
Soloists: 5 principals (soprano, 2 tenors, baritone, bass-baritone)*; 5 comprimario (soprano, 2 tenors, baritone, bass-baritone); supers
Orchestration: 1(pic)1(ca)1(bcl)1/1100/timp.perc/syn/str(10110)
*Also suitable for younger operatic voices
SYNOPSIS
Unlike Donizetti's opera Maria Stuarda, this opera focuses on the historic and chaotic political pressures (as well as personal ones) on the young Mary. She has just returned to Scotland as the widow of the Dauphin of France. She is a Catholic queen in a Protestant country. She is also confronted by her ambitious half-brother James, the bastard son of James V (and thus excluded from any consideration as monarch), by the rival Earl of Bothwell, a soldier who has always been loyal to her family, and eventually by a suitor from England - Henry, Lord Darnley, an heir to both Scottish and English thrones. Marriage to him would seem to secure the throne of both countries for her son. But Darnley proves to be a very unsuitable Consort, trusted by no-one. Later, he is murdered, Mary is compromised, for she very unwisely marries Bothwell who is under suspicion of Darnley's murder. She is forced to abdicate and flees to England leaving her son in Scotland to become King. Mary will now be in the power of her cousin Elizabeth. Andrew Porter wrote in The New Yorker, ‘I found myself forgetting about the careful planning, the parallels, the influences, and instead caring very much about Mary herself... rapt in the music. There is visionary quality in Mary'.
19
MUSGRAVE AT 95 THE OPERAS