THEA MUSGRAVE
A Catalogue of Operas
NOVELLO
The music of Thea Musgrave is of unique beauty and dramatic energy. It is a great honour and pleasure to publish the oeuvre of one of the most original and independently minded composers.
Wiebke Busch
Managing Director, Novello & Co Ltd
THEA MUSGRAVE at Ninety Five
On May 27, 2023 one of Britain's most distinguished composers, Thea Musgrave, celebrated her ninety-fifth birthday. In this booklet we have brought together tributes, programme notes and previously unseen photos highlighting a truly wonderful career spanning almost seventy-five years.
Today, Musgrave maintains a very active composing schedule, writing with amazing energy and passion, each work informed by a lifetime of intellect, craftsmanship and experience.
An Appreciation by Nick Daniel
1
Biography
3
An Interview
6
The Operas
13
The Abbot of Drimrock
14
A Christmas Carol
15
The Decision
16
Harriet, The Woman Called Moses
18
Mary, Queen of Scots
19
The Mocking-Bird
20
An Occurrence at Owl Creek Bridge
21
Pontalba
22
Simón Bolívar
24
The Voice of Ariadne
26
MUSGRAVE AT 95 A CATALOGUE OF OPERAS
Thea's signature flourish, present on the title page of all her manuscripts.
MUSGRAVE AT 95 AN APPRECIATION
AN APPRECIATION by Nick Daniel
t is a great honour and a privilege that my warm and much treasured friendship with Thea has resulted in a brilliant series of pieces written for me, showing her absolute mastery and total professionalism in writing for the oboe, which flows from her deep understanding of my playing and what I want to say with the instrument.
Thea was first suggested to me by Peter Maxwell Davies as an ideal composer to write a concerto for his 1994 St Magnus Festival. He wanted specifically a woman and a Scot. Thea produced Helios, one of the most original oboe concertos ever written, which requires a mixture of virtuosity, sound painting, movement, theatre and dramatic presentation. It also contains a spine tingling musical sunrise, a summer storm and a moonrise. The oboe plays the Sun-God, and I delighted Thea by wearing a bright red Nehru collar jacket at the premiere, which happened with the Scottish Chamber Orchestra in the cinema in Kirkwall with a force 10 gale regularly intruding into the performance! I remember meeting Thea for the first time at Heathrow Airport and discussing Helios. She had drawn a 'map' of the piece, showing dramatic intention, key relationships and structure, and already, without seeing a note of written music, her highly creative and fertile imagination got me very excited. Seeing these maps of hers is always a thrill as they give me an early view into what's going to be involved. Very generously she has given me some of them. Helios was the first in a series of pieces for different settings of the instrument. This forms an important body of work for the oboe and the cor anglais, and I was delighted when the recording company Harmonia Mundi agreed to release almost
1
MUSGRAVE AT 95 AN APPRECIATION
all of Thea's chamber music for oboe on my first album with them. When you play a piece of Thea's it's almost impossible to believe she doesn't play the instrument herself, so fluid and natural is her instrumental and vocal understanding and her complete professionalism. I've heard many people say this about her writing, but at the same time, this fluidity of technique is used at the service of great inspiration and ideas. Discipline and inspiration in perfect balance.
DOGGETTS
Left: Thea Musgrave and Nick Daniel following the world premiere of Helios in Orkney, 1995. Right: Thea and Nick, 2016.
Like many great opera composers Musgrave has brought dramatic elements from the stage to her concerto forms and chamber music. These elements may be visual, involving the artists to move or communicate visually in some way, or they may be purely musical. Being coached by her in how to present these aspects is a wonderful lesson in stagecraft. In her masterpiece for oboe and piano, Night Windows, inspired by Edward Hopper paintings, the drama is distilled into pure music with no diminishing of the dramatic effect of the music on the listener, and yet her oboe quartet, Cantilena, placed the oboe as an outsider and the string trio gradually, although at first suspiciously, welcome him into the group on stage. Thea asked for me to enter the hall some minutes after the piece had begun playing a top A!
Similarly in Two's Company for Dame Evelyn Glennie and me, she asked me to bow normally with Evelyn on entering, then immediately leave the stage, only to re-enter playing from memory on the opposite side of the Albert Hall. Quite a trot round I discovered! These motion and gestural aspects of the pieces bring the music to life in 3D for the audience and it's why, when Thea ascends the stage to bow and opens her arms in that warm way of hers, the same way she greets those of us lucky enough to be her friends, the audience's warmth is both audible and palpable. Yet Thea is as likely to drop an unexpected F Bomb as any composer I know, and in the next breath she will be telling us how she turned down a request from Tolkien to write a Lord of the Rings opera because there were just too many overtones of Wagner!
I send her very much love, wish her many more years of creativity, happy healthy life and a wonderful 90th year.
2
MUSGRAVE AT 95 BIOGRAPHY
THEA MUSGRAVE Biography
R
ich and powerful musical language and a strong sense of drama have made Scottish-American composer Thea Musgrave one of the most respected and
exciting contemporary composers in the Western world. Her works were first performed under the auspices of the BBC and at the Edinburgh International Festival. As a result, they have been widely performed in Britain, Europe and the USA, at major music festivals; such as Edinburgh, Warsaw Autumn, Florence Maggio Musicale, Venice Biennale, Aldeburgh, Cheltenham and Zagreb; on most of the European and American broadcasting stations and as part of many regular symphony concert series.
From time to time she has conducted her own works: the premiere of Mary, Queen of Scots at the 1977 Edinburgh International Festival and later with the San Francisco Spring Opera; the premiere performances of The Voice of Ariadne in Britain and again in New York and Los Angeles for the New York City Opera; and many orchestral concerts (Philadelphia, San Francisco, St Paul Chamber, Los Angeles Chamber, BBC Symphony, BBC Scottish Symphony, Royal Scottish National, Hong Kong Philharmonic, Jerusalem Philharmonic, etc.). It is a measure of her talent and determination that Musgrave has earned great respect for her work both as a composer and conductor at a time when these were still uncommon professions for a woman.
3
Photo: Kate Mount
18
MUSGRAVE AT 95 BIOGRAPHY
Born in Edinburgh, Scotland on 27 May 1928, she studied first at the University of Edinburgh and later at the Conservatoire in Paris, where she spent four years as a pupil of Nadia Boulanger, before establishing herself back in London as a prominent personality of British musical life. In 1970 she became Guest Professor at the University of California, Santa Barbara, which anchored her increasing involvement with the musical life of the United States. In 1971 she married the opera conductor Peter Mark, and has lived in America since 1972. In 1974 she received the Koussevitzky Award, resulting in the composition of Space Play, which, after its London premiere was performed in New York by the Lincoln Center Chamber Players. She has also been awarded two Guggenheim Fellowships, in 1974-75 and again in 1982-83, and was recognised with honorary degrees by Old Dominion University (Virginia), Smith College, Glasgow University and in May 2004, the New England Conservatory of Music in Boston. She was awarded a CBE in The Queen's New Year's Honours List in January 2002. As Distinguished Professor at Queens College, City University of New York from September 1987-2002, she has guided and interacted with many new and gifted young student composers.
Musgrave has consistently explored new means of projecting essentially dramatic situations in her music, frequently altering and extending the conventional boundaries of instrumental performance by incorporating physical movement to enhance the musical and dramatic impact of her works. As she once put it, she wanted to explore dramatic musical forms: some works are ‘dramatic-abstract', that is without programmatic content (such as the Concerto for Clarinet, the Horn Concerto, the Viola Concerto, and Space Play), and others project specific programmatic ideas (such as the paintings in The Seasons and Turbulent Landscapes, the poems in Ring Out Wild Bells, Journey through a Japanese Landscape, and Autumn Sonata, and the famous Greek legends in Orfeo, Narcissus, Helios and Voices from the Ancient World), all extensions of concerto principles. In some of these, to enhance the dramatic effect, the sonic possibilities of spatial acoustics have been incorporated: in the Clarinet Concerto the soloist moves around the different sections of the orchestra, and in the Horn Concerto the orchestral horns are stationed around the concert hall. Thus the players are not only the conversants in an abstract musical dialogue but also very much the living (and frequently peripatetic) embodiment of its dramatis personae.
It was therefore not surprising that her focus on the lyric and dramatic potential of music should have led to Musgrave's fluency in the field of opera, and it is interesting to see that her large-scale operas of the past thirty years, beginning with The Voice of Ariadne (1974) and followed by Mary, Queen of Scots (1977), A Christmas Carol (1979), Harriet, the Woman Called Moses (1984), and Simón Bolívar (1992), are in every sense the true successors to the instrumental concertos.
5
MUSGRAVE AT 95 AN INTERVIEW