A CHRISTMAS CAROL
(1979)
Libretto: Thea Musgrave, based on the story by Charles Dickens Language: English (German trans. Claus Henneberg)
Duration: 1 hour 50 minutes
Soloists: 2 sopranos, mezzo-soprano, tenor, 2 baritones,
bass-baritone, actor, dancer (or mime), 3 children*
Chorus: children's chorus (optional)
Orchestration: 1+pic.1+ca.2+bcl.1+cbn/1000/ 2perc/hp.pf/str(min.11111)
Commissioned by the Virginia Opera Association
*Also suitable for younger operatic voices
SYNOPSIS
It is a cold, foggy Christmas Eve. Scrooge, the miser, berates his clerk, Bob Cratchit, for arriving at work late and loudly derides the whole idea of Christmas. Later that night the ghost of Scrooge's deceased partner, Jacob Marley, confronts him. Marley laments that he is forever doomed because of his narrow and selfish life. He warns of a worse fate awaiting Scrooge. At the strike of one, The Spirit of Christmas Past appears. He shows Scrooge memories of his own childhood: his fondness for his sister Fan and the breakdown of his relationship for his young love, Belle. In Act Two, the jovial spirit of The Spirit of Christmas Present wakes Scrooge and leads him to the Cratchit house. There, the family, including Tiny Tim, assembles for Christmas dinner. Despite their poverty there is an atmosphere of warmth and merriment. Soon after, The Spirit of Christmas Future appears out of the gloom with several starving children (including Tiny Tim) and, in their desperation, they cling to him. He violently pushes them down. Tiny Tim is crushed and falls dead. Bewildered and distressed by events, Scrooge finds himself in a deserted graveyard facing his own tombstone, inscribed ‘Ebenezer Scrooge, miser; who lived unloved and alone.' Terrified, he renounces his miserly ways and swears henceforth to honour the spirit of Christmas.
15
MUSGRAVE AT 95 THE OPERAS
S. FEZZIWIG & COMPANY MERCHANTS
Top: The appearance of Jacob Marley (Howard Scammon); from the 1979 world premiere production of A Christmas Carol by Virginia Opera. Bottom: Christmas celebrations from Scrooge's past; from the 2002 revival by Virginia Opera.
16
MUSGRAVE AT 95 THE OPERAS