SOLOISTS AND CHAMBER ORCHESTRA
Oboe Concerto
(2018) 18'
Commissioned by the Adelaide Symphony Orchestra, Tasmanian Symphony Orchestra and West Australian Symphony Orchestra
First performed by Celia Craig with the Adelaide Symphony Orchestra conducted by Douglas Boyd October 2018
Oboe + 2022/2000/str
Alt: oboe and piano
Piano reduction on sale (CH87406-01) Score and parts on hire
Chester Music Ltd
Having played the oboe myself as a young person, the composition of an Oboe Concerto had an almost autobiographical significance for me. It was also a memory exercise, as I recalled in detail some of the music I had learned so carefully during those years. One important work, the Strauss Concerto, was helpful with my choice of accompanying instruments; just a wind octet plus strings.
My Concerto is in two movements. The first begins with the oboe more or less solo, flying lyrically through the open air, though soon in dialogue with the strings. The orchestral winds enter unobtrusively, one by one until gradually approaching the first of two major tuttis. After the second of these (which contrasts strong orchestral sentences with almost brutal oboe attacks) the music winds down, again lyrically, and with the oboe nearly always in the foreground.
The second movement could be compared with a passacaglia structure; an orchestral grid that repeats multiple times, but always in transformed scoring, for strings and (later on) bassoons only, with ornamentation by the oboe soloist. Some of the baroque and early classical concertos I used to play (for instance that by Cimarosa) were influential on the melancholy but also dance-like feel of this music.
Finally the winds re-enter with a short sequence of scherzo-like noises, before an extended, up-tempo coda brings the music to its conclusion with, once more, the oboe fluently in the foreground. J.W.
"...this piece confirms Weir's integrity: she writes what she wants to write, impervious to the criticisms of those who might disdain tonality. There is much sophisticated lyricism in this concerto, and real feeling.”
Hannah Nepilova, The Financial Times