THE CATALOGUE
Simone Canetty-Clarke
10
JUDITH WEIR THE COMPLETE CATALOGUE
ORCHESTRA
Begin Afresh
(2022) 17'
Commissioned by BBC Radio 3
First performed by the BBC Symphony Orchestra conducted by Sakari Oramo at the Royal Albert Hall on 24th August 2023 as part of the BBC Proms
3(III:pic).2+ca.2+bcl.2+cbn/4.3.2+btbn.1/timp.2perc/pf/str
Score and parts on hire
Chester Music Ltd
Begin Afresh is a kind of diary, an almost continuous survey of musical reflections about the trees and plants I observed, in a very urban setting, over the period of a year. During my year of writing, starting in the spring, I had to break off twice, in early autumn and at the start of the new year; so I titled the three parts of this composition with the name of the month in which I started or restarted it – April, October and February.
My first impression, inviting me to begin the piece, was simply the sound in April of new leaves on branches moving in the wind; I realised I was hearing the repeated “afresh” sound at the end of Philip Larkin's poem, The Trees;
"Last year is dead, they seem to say, Begin afresh, afresh, afresh.”
1. April often refers to this refreshing aural moment. Big textures suddenly cut away to reveal very quiet, almost inaudible movement.
II. October observes the heaviness of trees still in leaf amidst increasing darkness.
III. February begins by considering the depth and strength of tree roots, despite the opposition of cold and darkness.
These impressions may seem generic – they're tree events I look forward to every year. But I should add that the year 2022 contained a horrible event I hadn't seen before: leaves falling in August after the extreme heat and drought of that summer. J.W.
“Though trees themselves are necessarily static, Weir's three-movement score is anything but. It ripples sinuously in the spring, with almost a concertante role for lead violin Igor Yuzefovich, pulses mysteriously in the autumn, and is full of mostly quiet activity even in midwinter. Begin Afresh, a title drawn from Philip Larkin, is delicately scored and its ideas are always evolving in a recognisably traditional way” Martin Kettle, The Guardian
11
BBC/Andy Paradise
12
PANOPUS SCORE-SYSTEM PRINTE
RINTED IN ENGLAND COPYRIGHT PANOPUS LTD. 1976
VANNDING EDGEY
3F3
23
2 Oboes Cor Amylas
3 Urin Bb
2 Baisans
Contra Bassoon
23
4 Hos F
4
Trumpch
mc
3 Troub
Tuba
Percussin
Timpani
Violin 2
SOLO NA.1
Forest
Judith Weir (1995)
SOLO 10:2
mp
Viola
SOLOYLA.3
mp
Solo rut.4
mp
mp
1 SOLO
mp
Cello Bass
due
Copyright 1995 Chester Music Ltd.
30 MANOPUS SCORE-SYSTEM
mp
dur
Order Rel. No. 12704
ORCHESTRA
13
Brighter Visions Shine Afar
(2023) 3'
Commissioned by His Majesty King Charles III for The Coronation First performed on Saturday 6th May 2023 at Westminster Abbey by the Coronation Orchestra conducted by Sir Antonio Pappano
1.2.2.1/2.3.0+btbn.0/timp/hp/str(8.6.3.2.2)
Score and parts on hire
Chester Music Ltd
Forest
(1995) 13'
Commissioned by The John Feeney Charitable Trust
First performed on December 13, 1995 by the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra,
conducted by Sir Simon Rattle.
3.2+ca.3.2+cbn/44(in C)31/timp.2perc(mba)/str
Score and parts on hire
Chester Music Ltd
I started to write this piece with nothing but the opening melody in mind. As I arranged this apparently simple material for an initial ensemble of four solo violas and cello, the intertwining lines seemed to be sprouting musical leaves; or, in other words, interesting melodic and harmonic fragments were being generated almost as if in a process of nature. After observing a few more pages of these self-propagating complications take shape, I decided on the title Forest. Nearly everything in the piece has grown from the tiny musical seeds encountered in the opening bars, and the composition has unfolded in a particularly natural and organic way.
Within the final pages, a different, more distinct world is occasionally glimpsed. Perhaps this is the forest of folklore and prehistory, rather than the animated and burgeoning biological site examined in the man part of the music. On reaching the conclusion, a region of faint string chords, I felt rather like a fairy tale character pressing deeper and deeper into a mysterious prospect of trees. J.W.
"Weir's 13-minute, quasi-Romantic tone poem Forest was satisfying, its dense tuttis and thick, reiterated harmony genuinely allowing one to imagine the large and necessarily wood-dominated orchestra as the entity of the title"
Paul Driver, The Sunday Times
I give you the end of a golden string
(2013) 16'
Co-commissioned by the Royal Philharmonic Society and Britten-Pears Foundation to celebrate the centenary of the birth of Benjamin Britten and the bicentenary of the foundation of the Royal Philharmonic Society
First performed on 8th June 2013 by the Britten Sinfonia conducted by Ryan Wigglesworth
string orchestra (min. 6.4.4.4.2)
Full Score (CH81268) on sale Score and parts on hire Chester Music Ltd
14
JUDITH WEIR THE COMPLETE CATALOGUE