Missa Del Cid
(1988) 25'
Commissioned by the BBC
First performed on a BBC Television documentary by Combattimento conducted by David Mason
Text in English by Judith Weir, from the Spanish epic ‘Poema de Mio Cid' (13thC) and from the Latin Mass
Narrator and SAAATTTBBB chorus unaccompanied
Score on sale (CH58776)
Chester Music Ltd
Missa del Cid was written in 1988, as part of BBC TV's 'Sound on Film' series, which showed the first performance of the piece in its entirety, together with a documentary about its creation. Subsequently, the work (originally written for ten solo voices) has reappeared in several other guises; performed live in concert, recorded on CD, and staged as part of an operatic evening about the era of the Crusades.
The text of the piece has two sources which at first may seem completely contradictory; a version of the Latin mass, and a short selection from the vast Spanish medieval epic poem Poema De Mio Cid which chronicles the life and times of the legendary warlord and outlaw Rodrigo Díaz de Vivar, now known to us (via Hollywood and Charlton Heston) as El Cid.
The Cid, who lived in the second half of the eleventh century, was edged out of the court of Castile and at first fought on the side of the Moorish Emir of Saragossa (the title 'Cid' is said to come from the the Arabic Sayyidi, ‘My lord'). But the Cid later changed sides, and began to besiege the Moorish city of Valencia. It is in this frame of mind that he is found in the poem, jubilantly menacing the Moors at every opportunity, whilst justifying his violent deeds as devotion to the Christian religion, ridding the world of infidels.
The Cid's pugnacious Christianity is often hilarious in its extremity; but similar statements combining religious fervour and blood lust have often been heard, even in our own time, on the eve of battle. In Missa del Cid I set out to 'showcase' this absurd and dangerous contradiction in a piece which combines a few of the Cid's exploits (related by a speaking 'Evangelist') with a choral mass setting.
The opening Kyrie takes place in the besieged city of Valencia; its long, yearning lines are marked 'like a Muezzin's call to prayer'. The Gloria, in a cheerful 6/8 rhythm, echoes the Cid's relish for a good fight in God's name. In the Credo, the Cid's family go to church, and the Cid's wife sings a passionate prayer for his safety. During the Sanctus, the Cid is visited in his dreams by the Angel Gabriel, who advises him to ride out into battle and certain victory. The battle takes place during the Benedictus; and the Agnus Dei simply indicates tombstones, surrounded by silence and desolation. J.W.
2
Missa del Cid
Here begins the story of the great deeds of the Cid of Vivar. His men were Evangelist: Fich beyond all reckoning. After the Cid had left Saragossa, he passed through Huesa and the lands of Montalban, and occupied the pass of Olocau. Then he moved towards the sea to start fighting there, for the sun rises in the east and he turned in
The Cid took Jérica, Onda and Almenara, and he conquered the whole of the country round Burmand. He did all this with God's help, and when he Captured Murviedro he was sure the Creator was on his side. Within the walls of Valencia, great fear spread.
152: Full voiced and specions, like a Mugais
Los moros Haman Ma-homet
T
The Moors cried:
Mahomet, los
The Moors cried:
Mahnt,
(1
B2
13円
Los mo-
-505
4
Uaman mf
poro coin.
lossno-
105
Laman
Compright 1988 for all countries JoW Chester/Edition Wilhelm Hansen London Ltd.
-Our
33
67
68
JUDITH WEIR THE COMPLETE CATALOGUE
Psalm 148
(2008) 6'
Commissioned to celebrate the 800th Anniversary of the University of Cambridge
First performed on St Cecilia's Day, 22nd November 2009 at the chapel of Gonville & Caius College, Cambridge sung by the Choir of Gonville & Caius College, with Matthew Knight, trombone
Text in English from Psalm 48
SATB chorus and trombone
Full Score (CH75339) and Trombone Part (CH75339-01) on sale Chester Music Ltd