JUDITH WEIR THE COMPLETE CATALOGUE
Which is why listening to her music is so often an adventure that leaves you wanting more: you might start by hearing King Harald's Saga, her opera for solo singer (but a cast of thousands), which leads you to explore the spine-tingling play-within-a-play of her first full-scale stage work, A Night at the Chinese Opera. Or you begin with her choral music, like the blood-soaked drama of Missa del Cid, and wind up in the furthest reaches of the universe with her Moon and Star, setting Emily Dickinson for a cosmic choir and orchestra. On instead you listen to her song On Buying a Horse and realise there's another Horse poem in her orchestral song-cycle Natural History, which might lead you back to the battlefields of King Harald, where another journey through her music can begin again, and begin afresh.
And talking of beginnings: the openings of Judith Weir's are so often invitations to the otherworlds of her pieces, in which we're led by what sounds like simple gestures into a place in which the conventions of musical gravity and story-telling are upended.
Take the start of Moon and Star: three piccolos and three glockenspiels, moving down in steps, making a melody as beguilingly simple as you could imagine, and yet the harmonies underneath throw us up to the firmament and make you lose your
harmonic footing. When the choral voices enter, the magic only increases: the voices make gasps of wonder, phrases that are framed by the chiming of the glockenspiels and swelling brass writing from the depths of the orchestra. The miracle of this opening, written up there on the constellations and brought to earth by the magic of Weir's composition, is that none of its elements are in themselves complex. It's the way they're put together with such concision and precision that counts. They create a visceral sensation of vast spaces, but are made with an extraordinary economy. Moon and Star is a whole universe that lasts just 15 minutes, proving another of the definitive qualities of Judith Weir's music: the more concentrated and clear the idea is, the more of its imaginative power she can release.
There's a related alchemy at the start of Forest, for orchestra. Music for four solo violas and cello unfurls as if we're listening to part of a process that was already underway before our attention caught up with it, a cellular musical reaction that was always there, it just took Weir's imagination to find it. The way the ideas sprout “musical leaves”, as she writes, in how they enfold the whole orchestra, put her in mind of the “self-propagating" processes of nature, since “everything in the piece has grown from the tiny musical seeds encountered in the opening bars".
CB
INTRODUCTION
5
Royal Philharmonic Society/Matt Crossick
This is organic music, but its teeming diversity and unpredictability, all stemming from the same musical seeds, isn't about proving this piece's compositional coherence, but an openness to incident and adventure. Forest is an orchestral work that's as surprising, as cosseting, and as disturbing as a walk in any natural landscape.
Those are openings that distil the essences of their pieces: there are other beginnings that plunge us into instantly conjured dramatic worlds, like the chiming harmonic radiance at the start of A Night at the Chinese Opera, which flings us out there with the Nightwatchman and the moonlit skies of 13th century China; or the Flying Prelude that opens Blond Eckbert. It's music is a simple scale with a twist, a tune that mimics the flapping of The Bird's wings. Composed in just two lines, it's music that's suspended above the earth, and which suspends all of us in the opera's upside-down world of dark fairytale.
But it's not only the conjured-afresh beginnings to her pieces. That feeling is a constant in Weir's music, as if it were always in state of becoming, of endlessly beginning. Forest ends with one of the most jaw-
dropping changes of scene in her orchestral music. She puts it like this: “Within the final pages, a different, more distinct world is occasionally glimpsed... On reaching the conclusion, a region of faint string chords,
I felt rather like a fairy tale character pressing deeper and deeper into a mysterious prospect of trees”.
The shimmering tremolo strings are spine- tingling revelations when you hear Forest as if you could touch the place behind reality, a region that's always there but hardly ever accessed, let alone given to us as an experience in musical time by a composer. Yet that's what Weir's music gives us. Those mysterious realms into which she is led by her music are where we follow as her listeners.
And if you take her invitation, and journey where the glint and glimmer of her imagination takes you, the world is remade: suddenly it's a place in which the mundane can become the magical, in which a grain of a story can stand for the whole universe, in which a bird sings, a glockenspiel chimes, and the cosmos responds. That's what Judith Weir's music gives us: an everyday transcendence, the extraordinary, magical reality.