SOLOISTS AND ORCHESTRA
Natural History
(1998) 17'
Commissioned by the Boston Symphony Orchestra
First performed on 14th January 1999 by Boston Symphony Opera and Dawn Upshaw
conducted by Sir Simon Rattle at Symphony Hall, Boston
Text by Chuang Tzu (4thC BCE) from The Inner Chapters [English] Soprano + 3(pic,afl)333(cbn)/4301/timp.2perc/hp/str
Alt: soprano and piano
Full Score (CH79574) and Vocal Score on sale (CH79574-01) Chester Music Ltd
Natural History is a setting, for soprano and large orchestra, of four brief texts taken from Chuang-tzu, a classic collection of Taoist writings from the 4th, 3rd and 2nd centuries BCE. The oldest of these writings are known as The Inner Chapters, ascribed to Chuang-Tzu himself; and it is from this section of the work that all the texts of Natural History have been selected.
My interest in Chinese philosophical literature began in my teens, and was directly inspired by my enthusiasm for the writings of John Cage, in which ancient Chinese ideas are frequently connected to musical models. The texts of Natural History (which I have considerably compressed, from the translation by A C Graham) are typical of the qualities I most enjoy amongst this literature; concision, clarity, lightness and (hidden) wisdom. All four texts are short parables about natural life as lived by different species, human and animal; a Taoist Carnival of the Animals, in fact.
I am well aware that my own interpretations of these ancient wisdoms may be idiosyncratic, and spring from an avowedly Western sensibility. But nevertheless, these are ideas with which, in my own way, I have long been familiar; and I have for some time considered Taoism to be the most helpful of established philosophies in the conduct of modern life.
17
Lucy Crowe with Simon Rattle and the LSO.
Mark Allan
In choosing texts for Natural History, I aimed to find words which would allow both clear storytelling and opulent singing; in fact several of the songs might be said to approximate to the pattern of ‘recitative and aria'. The relatively large orchestra (triple woodwind, full brass but with no trombones, harp, percussion and strings) provides, in effect, the naturalistic scenery for these stories.
1. Horse. The text discriminates between the natural behaviour of wild horses and the unfortunate consequences of training them. An analogy with the behaviour of people is unspoken but implied. The music underlines this idea with an elegaic opening for an ensemble of three solo celli; followed by exacting rhythmic patterning in the ‘trained' section.
2. Singer. This is the story of a singer who lived (as many musicians do) in the most
straitened, poverty-stricken circumstances; but he possessed a magnificent voice, and was therefore, in Taoist reality, richer and greater than anyone else. A contrast is made between the careful spare orchestration of the opening and the huge orchestral fanfares punctuating the singer's 'aria'.
3. Swimmer. At the opening of the song, a man is glimpsed swimming, and perhaps drowning, in the throes of a massive and rocky orchestral chasm. But in mid-song, he climbs out of the waters and sings to his interlocutor (who happens to be Confucius) a jaunty melody (in 7/8 rhythm) in which he explains his simple mastery of the waves.
4. Fish/Bird. A giant creature of incredible dimensions, which appears as both fish and bird, is described in a passage which seems to me to describe our uncomprehending perceptions of the infinite. The orchestral accompaniment, dominated by high instruments, reminds me of the vapour trails of aircraft, stretched out over a blue sky. J.W.
“Weir's Natural History is 'Taoist Carnival of Animals', four settings of short Confucian parables that make their points gently and undogmatically. It makes no attempt to evoke chinoiserie in the music. These are deft, serious songs, beautifully judged and sparingly scored. Every gesture, every nuance counts."
Andrew Clements, The Guardian
18
JUDITH WEIR THE COMPLETE CATALOGUE
Piano Concerto
(1997) 15'
Commissioned by Dr and Mrs Anthony Henfrey for the Spitalfields Festival First performed on 12th June 1997 at Christ Church, Spitalfields by William Howard and the BT Scottish Ensemble
Piano + strings (min 2.2.2.2.1)
Piano Part on sale (SOS15642)
Score and parts on hire
Chester Music Ltd
Ox Mountain Was Covered By Trees
(1990) 5'
Dedicated to Norman Platt and Kent Opera
First performed on 30th September 1990 at the Marlow Theatre, Canterbury by Kent Opera conducted by Ivan Fischer Jacqueline Fugelle (soprano), Michael Chance (counter tenor) and Andrew Shore (baritone), and the Kent Opera Orchestra
Text by Mencius (Chinese, 3rdC B.C.) [English]
Soprano, Countertenor, Baritone + 2222/2000/str
Alt: Soprano, Counter-tenor/pf (1997)
Full Score (SOS04166) and Piano Reduction (CH63217) on sale Score and parts on hire
Chester Music Ltd
C.T
vla
ch
There;
7
12
66163 A
mp
di
grazed
C.Ta
bere.
after some time, the mountain was gaunt and
f
06.2
8
60
CT
barren today
-gine it
ways treeless.
M.
d
mp
People who see it
(attace)