Biography
Ursula Mamlok was born in 1923 in Berlin, Germany where she received a musical education early on. Due to her Jewish origin, she was persecuted by the National Socialists and fled with her parents to relatives in Guayaquil, Ecuador in February 1939.
In the summer of 1940 she left Ecuador to accept a scho- larship for music study at the Mannes School of Music in New York. Her parents were only able to immigrate to the United States in March 1941.
In the summer of 1944 she spent several months at Black Mountain College which was well known for its affinity with the Bauhaus and for numerous renowned faculty including Roger Sessions, Edward Steuermann and Ernst Krenek with whom she took a masterclass and who introduced her for the first time to the teachings of Arnold Schoenberg.
In 1947 she married the Hamburg-born Dwight (Dieter) Mamlok who had fled Germany with the Kindertransport of refugee children to Sweden. In 1945 he went to the United States. He was a business man and, on the side, active as a writer.
In the following years Ursula Mamlok studied composition in New York with such teachers as Roger Sessions, Jerzy Fitelberg, Erich Itor Kahn, Stefan Wolpe and Ralph Shapey. She completed her Masters Degree in 1957 at the Manhat- tan School of Music where she studied with Vittorio Giannini.
Ursula Mamlok am Klavier, New York, 1965
She developed into one of the most significant women composers in the United States and, for more than forty years, she taught music theory and composition at such institutions as the Manhattan School of Music.
Many renowned American musicians performed Ursula Mamlok's works, including Lucy Shelton, Charles Nei- dich, Cheryl Seltzer, Joel Sachs, the Continuum Ensem- ble and the Da Capo Chamber Players in New York, just to mention a few. Commissioned by the San Francisco Symphony, the orchestral composition, Constellations, was a milestone and premiered in 1994 under the direc- tion of Herbert Blomstedt.
After the death of her husband in 2005, Ursula Mam- lok decided to move to Berlin in 2006; it was the launch for a second career. Thanks to her collaboration with the musicologist and radio journalist Bettina Brand, such distinguished ensembles as the Klenke Quartett, musikFabrik and the modern art ensemble, venues including the Spectrum Concerts Berlin series and first- class musicians like Kolja Lessing, Holger Groschopp, Hartmut Rohde, Stephan Picard, Jakob Spahn and many more became vigorous advocates for her music. Her personal encounter with the Swiss oboist, composer and conductor Heinz Holliger led to important artistic exchanges.
-
In 2012 Habakuk Traber's biography Time in Flux – Die Komponistin Ursula Mamlok was published by Böhlau-Verlag.
In 2013 the world premiere of the full-length documen- tary film Ursula Mamlok Movements by Anne Berrini was held at the Hackesche Höfe Cinema in Berlin.
In November 2013 she received the German Federal Cross of Merit, First Class.
To date her works have been released on five CDs by the New York label Bridge Records and, in addition, by such labels as CRI/New World Records, kreuzberg records and NAXOS.
Her principal publishers are C. F. Peters and Boosey & Hawkes Bote & Bock.
On 4 May 2016 Ursula Mamlok died at the age of 93 in Berlin. She was laid to rest at the Jewish cemetery Weißensee in Berlin.
Following her death, the Dwight and Ursula Mamlok Foundation was established.
On 3 February 2017 the inaugural event took place, hosted in collaboration with the Academy of the Arts Berlin.
Ursula Mamlok's archive is located in the Academy of Arts Berlin. More: www.mamlokstiftung.com
5
6