ILSE FROMM-MICHAELS
Ilse Fromm-Michaels was born in Hamburg on 30 December 1888. At a very early age she began to display a gift for music, and was already beginning to compose by the time she was eight years old. She also made rapid progress on the piano, and was able to enter the Berlin Musikhochschule at the age of 13. Here she studied composition with Heinrich van Eyken and the piano with Professor Bender. In 1905-1908 she attended the Stern Conser- vatory, where her teachers were James Kwast (piano) and Hans Pfitzner (composition). In 1911-1913 she completed her studies in Cologne with the conductor and composer Fritz Steinbach and the pianist Carl Friedberg.
In 1908 Ilse Fromm-Michaels embarked on a career as a concert pianist, and over the ye- ars worked with many prominent conductors, including Hermann Abendroth, Max Fied- ler, Wilhelm Furtwängler, Eugen Jochum, Otto Klemperer, Carl Schuricht, Fritz Steinbach and Arthur Nikisch. Her recitals displayed a predilection for the music of contemporary composers such as Busoni, Pfitzner, Reger, Jarnach, Hindemith, Stravinsky, Milhaud, Gra- nados, Schoenberg, Berg, Webern, Bartók and Kodály. However, she also played many of her own works, which were composed between 1908 and 1919. These included Vier Puppen, Op. 4, Acht Skizzen, Op. 5, the Op. 6 Sonata, Walzerreigen, Op. 7, and Variationen über ein eigenes Thema, Op. 8. Later, at the beginning of the 1930s, she composed the Passacaglia, Op. 16.
In 1933 her husband, Dr Walter Michaels, a Hamburg judge, was forced to retire from the bench on account of the National Socialist 'Nuremberg Laws', and constrains soon began to be placed on her professional activities. Within a relatively short space of time she was banned from playing in public, and it was no longer possible to perform her com- positions. She was still allowed to teach, though as a result of political pressure she had fewer and fewer pupils. These changes caused her a great deal of suffering. Furthermore, she was deeply saddened by the political situation in Germany, and this is reflected in the serious and at times melancholy character ot the works she composed during this peri- od of 'inner emigration', e.g. the Symphony, Op. 19, which was written in 1938, and Marien-Passion, Op. 18. Towards the end of the 1930s Ilse Fromm-Michaels studied all of Mozart's piano concertos in great detail, and wrote cadenzas for the concertos in C major, K. 467, E flat major, K. 482, C major, K. 503, and D major, K. 537 (the ‘Coronation' Concerto), four works for which there are no extant original cadenzas by Mozart. These cadenzas bear witness to her wholly personal understanding of and sensitive and high- ly responsible approach to these stylistically diverse concertos. Composed in 1948-1949, Drei Rilke- Gesänge for baritone and piano (or orchestra) was destined to be her last work, a very compelling and large-scale compositional utterance.
8
After the Second World War Ilse Fromm-Michaels decided to devote herself to teaching the piano. In 1946 she joined the staff of the Hamburg School of Music and Drama, and was subsequently appointed to a professorship when this institution became the Musik- hochschule. In 1959 she was the first woman to be elected to the 'Freie Akademie der Künste' in Hamburg, and in 1964 was awarded the Hamburg Johannes Brahms Medal. In 1973 she moved to Detmold to join her son, Jost Michaels. She died here on 22 January 1986.
9
Jost Michaels
[translation by Alfred Clayton]